





Nyanatiloka Thera 


This eBook is offered freely. If you wish, 
you may donate and help us continue offering our services. 
May you be happy! 


To make a donation, please visit: 
WWW.pariyatti.org 


PARIYATTI 


867 Larmon Road Onalaska, 
Washington 98570 USA 
360.978.4998 





WWwW.pariyatti.org 


Pariyatti is a nonprofit organization dedicated to enriching 
the world by: 


** Disseminating the words of the Buddha 
** Providing sustenance for the seeker's journey 
** Illuminating the meditator's path 


Buddhist Dictionary 


BUDDHIST 
DICTIONARY 


Manual of Buddhist Terms 
and Doctrines 


by Nyanatiloka Thera 
Edited by Nyanaponika Thera 


Sixth revised edition 





BPS PanivATTI EDITIONS 


BPS Pariyatti Editions 
an imprint of 
Pariyatti Publishing 
WWNW.partyatti.org 


© Buddhist Publication Society, 1952 


All rights reserved. No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any 
manner whatsoever without the written permission of BPS Pariyatti Editions, 
except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical articles and reviews. 


Published by Buddhist Publication Society, Kandy, Sri Lanka, 2004. 


First BPS Pariyatti Edition, 2019 
ISBN: 978-1-68172-096-8 (Print) 
ISBN: 978-1-68172-099-9 (PDF) 
ISBN: 978-1-68172-097-5 (ePub) 
ISBN: 978-1-68172-098-2 (Mobi) 
LCCN: 2017915243 


Printed in the USA 








vii 


From the 
Preface to the First Edition 


As a first attempt of an authentic dictionary of Buddhist doctrinal terms, 
used in the Pali Canon and its Commentaries, this present manual will 
fill a real gap felt by many students of Buddhism. It provides the reader 
not with a mere superficial enumeration of important Pali terms and their 
English equivalents, but offers him precise and authentic definitions and 
explanations of canonical and post-canonical terms and doctrines, based 
on Sutta, Abhidhamma and the Commentaries, and illustrated by numerous 
quotations taken from these sources, so that, if anyone wishes, he could, 
by intelligently joining together the different articles, produce without 
difficulty a complete exposition of the entire teachings of Buddhism. 


As already pointed out by the author in the preface to his Guide through the 
Abhidhamma Pitaka (Colombo 1938), there are found in the Abhidhamma 
Canon numerous technical terms not met with in the Sutta Canon; and 
again other terms are found only in the Commentaries and not in Sutta 
and Abhidhamma. The author therefore has made a first attempt— without, 
however, laying any claim to absolute reliability or completeness in this 
by no means easy undertaking — to indicate in the Appendix all the terms 
that in the oldest Sutta texts are either not found at all, or at least not in the 
same form or meaning, and to set forth how far these are deviations from 
the older texts, or further developments. 


In this connection, the author wishes to state that the often quoted 
Patisambhidamagga, as well as Niddesa, Buddhavamsa and Cariyapitaka, 
though included in the Khuddaka Nikaya of the Sutta Pitaka, nevertheless 
bear throughout the character of Commentaries, and though apparently older 
than the Sutta Commentaries handed down to us in Buddhaghosas version, 
must doubtless belong to a later period of origin than the Abhidhamma 
Canon. 


In rendering the terms into English, I often had to differ considerably from 
the interpretation of Western scholars, and to introduce quite new words. A 
great number of such earlier translations must be considered partly as totally 
incorrect, partly as misleading, or at the very least ambiguous. Incorrect 
are, for instance, the English renderings of náma-rüpa by ‘name and form’; 
javana (impulsion, i.e., the karmic impulsive moments) by ‘apperception’, 
etc. 


The expositions concerning the true nature of the Eightfold Path, the Four 
Noble Truths, the paticcasamuppáda and the five groups of existence 
— doctrines which, with regard to their true nature, have been often 
misunderstood by Western authors — are sure to come to many as a 
revelation. 


viii / 





On the doctrine of anattd, or ‘egolessness’, i.e., the impersonality and 
emptiness of all phenomena of existence, the author repeatedly felt the 
necessity of throwing light from every possible point of view, for it is 
exactly this doctrine which, together with the doctrine of the conditionality 
of all phenomena of existence, constitutes the very essence of the whole 
Teaching of the Buddha without which it will be by no means possible to 
understand it in its true light. Thus the doctrine of impersonality runs like a 
red thread right through the whole book. 


May this little manual provide an ever-helpful companion and vade mecum 
to all earnest students in their study of the original Buddhist scriptures, and 
also give to Buddhist authors and lecturers the opportunity of supplementing 
and deepening their knowledge of the profound teachings of the Buddha! 


Should it, for a better understanding, prove necessary to give to certain 
subjects a more detailed treatment, the carrying out of this task may be 
reserved for a later edition of this work. 
Nyanatiloka 
Central Internment Camp 
Dehra-Dun, India 
28-8-1946. 





ix 





Editor's Preface 


The present revised and enlarged Third Edition was intended to be issued 
in commemoration of the tenth anniversary of the venerable author's 
passing away on 28th May 1957. But due to unavoidable circumstances the 
publication had to be delayed. 


It was the venerable author's wish to enlarge the first edition of this work, but 
when a second edition became necessary, he was prevented from expanding 
it by the illness to which he later succumbed. It rested, therefore, with his 
pupil, the present editor, to make, within the original scope and character of 
the work, such additions and revisions as seemed useful. 


Over seventy articles have been expanded and partly rewritten; others were 
slightly revised; more source references were included, and information on 
literature for further study of the respective subjects was added to some of 
the articles. But only very few new words have been added (e.g. anupassand, 
anupubbi-kathà, etc.). This restriction was observed because the venerable 
author himself thought only of ‘a more detailed treatment’ of existing articles 
(see Preface to the first ed.) as he obviously wished to preserve the original 
form and character of the book. It was also considered that the adding of 
more words such as those coined in later commentarial and Abhidhammic 
literature, would be superfluous as in the English language such terms will 
generally be found only in a few scholarly books and translations which 
themselves give the explanations needed. 


This book is chiefly intended for those who study the Buddhist teachings 
through the medium of the English language, but wish to familiarise 
themselves with some of the original Pali terms of doctrinal import. They 
are in the same position as a student of philosophy or science who has to 
know the terminology of his field, which for common parlance is mostly 
not less ‘unfamiliar’ than are the words of the Pali language found in the 
Dictionary. 


Such acquaintance with the Pali terms of the original texts will also be 
useful to the student for the purpose of identifying the various renderings 
of them favoured by different translators. It is deplorable that there is a 
considerable multiplication of new English coinages for the same doctrinal 
term. This great variety of renderings has proved to be confusing to those 
students of Buddhism who are not familiar with the Pali language. Even at 
this late stage when many translations of Pali texts are in print, it will be 
desirable if, for the sake of uniformity, translators forgo their preference 
for their own coining, even if they think them better than others. In any 
case, doctrinal terms have to be known by definition, just as in the case of 
philosophical and technical terms in a Western language. 


As a small help in the situation described, a number of alternative renderings 
used by other translators have been included in some articles of this edition. 


x/ 


In a very few cases, unacceptable though familiar renderings have been 
bracketed. Venerable Nyanatilokas own preferences have been placed 
within inverted commas. Generally it may be said that his renderings, based 
on his comprehensive knowledge of texts and doctrine, are very sound 
and adequate. Only in a very few cases has the editor changed the author's 
preferred rendering e.g. ‘canker’ for asava (instead of ‘bias’), ‘right view’ 
for sammáà-ditthi (instead of ‘right understanding’). The latter change was 
made for the sake of economising with the few English equivalents for the 
numerous Pali synonyms for ‘knowing’, etc.; and also to avoid having to 
render the opposite term, micchd-ditthi, by ‘wrong understanding’. 





This Dictionary appeared also in the author’s own German version (published 
by Verlag Christiani, Konstanz, Germany) and in a French translation made 
by the late Mme Suzanne Karpeles (published by ‘Adyar’, Paris, 1961). 

Nyanaponika 

Kandy, Ceylon 

February 1970. 


Only a few and minor revisions have been made to the text of the Fourth 
Edition which is now issued by the Buddhist Publication Society. 
Nyanaponika 
Kandy, Sri Lanka 
March 1980. 


In the Fifth Revised Edition the source information from the Appendix has 
been brought into the body of the Dictionary. The Appendix still contains 
the list of post-canonical terms, but the citations in the body of the text are 
listed as “source notes”. The citations have received virtually no editing, 
but the dictionary as a whole has been extensively edited for uniformity in 
style and usage. 

BPS 

Kandy, Sri Lanka 

March 1988. 


This sixth revised edition is a cooperative effort of the BPS and Pariyatti. 
In this edition the abbreviation scheme and reference systems have been 
modernised. Moreover, some of the “source notes"—made in an age 
when digital search tools were not available, and originally located in an 
appendix—have been revised by me in order to accurately reflect the first 
occurences of terms and to avoid duplication of statements already found in 
the entries. The British spelling of words has been retained. 

Bhikkhu Nyanatusita 

Kandy, Sri Lanka 

September 2017. 





xi 





JF 
AN 


Abh 
Abhidh-s 
Abhidh-s-Tr 


Abbreviations 


The verbal root of the word. 

Anguttara Nikaya (figures refer to number of book (nipdta) 
and sutta). 

Abhidhamma Pitaka (Canon). 

Abhidhammattha-sangaha. 

Abhidhammattha-sangaha Translation, Compendium of 
Philosophy, translated by Shwe Zan Aung. PTS Translation 
Series. 

Abhidhamma Studies, by Nyanaponika Thera (BPS). 
Atthasalini (Commentary to Dhammasangant). 

Atthasdlini Translation, The Expositor, translated by Maung 
Tin. PTS Translation Series. 

Otto Bóhtlingk, Sanskrit-Wérterbuch. 

Buddhist Publication Society, Kandy. 

Cula Niddesa. 

Commentary. 

Digha Nikaya (figures: number of sutta). 

Dhammapada. 

Dhammasangani. 

Fundamentals of Buddhism, Nyanatiloka (BPS). 

Guide through the Abhidhamma Pitaka, Nyanatiloka, 3rd ed. 
1971 (BPS). 

Itivuttaka. 

Kathavatthu. 

Khuddakapatha. 

Minor Readings & Illustrator, translation of Khp & Com by 
Nanamoli Thera. PTS Translation Series. 

Majjhima Nikaya (figures: number of sutta). 

Maha Niddesa. 

Patthana. 

Pàli-English Dictionary (PTS). 

Path to Deliverance, Nyanatiloka (BPS). 

Patisambhidamagga. 

Pali Text Society's editions. 

Puggalapafifatti (figures: paragraphs). 

Samyutta Nikaya (figures: numbers of samyutta and sutta). 
Sanskrit. 

Suttanipata (figures: numbers of verses). 

Theragatha. 

quod vide, “which see"; refers to an another article. 


xii / 
Ud 


Vibh 
Vism 


Wheel 
WB 
Yam 





Udana. 

Vibhanga. 

Visuddhimagga (figures refer to numbers of chapters and par- 
agraphs as in The Path of Purification, translated by Nanamoli 
Thera, 3rd ed., BPS). 

The Wheel published by BPS. 

The Word of the Buddha, Nyanatiloka (BPS). 

Yamaka. 


Contents 


From the Preface to the First Edition ................... eee vii 


Editors Preface eset ett tete tette bee ESTEE eoe MERERETUR ee ix 


AbbtevidtiOBS «detener THESE aetevesesetvestoncemee tems NERIS ui. xi 








Buddhist Dictionary 





ABANDONMENT | 3 


A 


abandonment, contemplation of: patinissaggdnupassand, is one of the 
eighteen chief kinds of insight; see vipassana, further Gndpdna-sati (16). 


abbhokasik’anga: ‘living in the open air’, is one of the ascetic means to 
purification (see dhutaniga). 


aberration (in morality and understanding): see vipatti. 


abhabbagamana: 'incapable of progressing. "Those beings who are 
obstructed by their evil actions (kamma see karma), by their defilements 
(kilesa, q.v.), by the result of their evil actions (see vipáka), or who are devoid 
of faith, energy and knowledge, and unable to enter the right path and 
reach perfection in wholesome things, all those are said to be incapable of 
progressing” (Pug 13). According to the Commentary the ‘evil actions’ denote 
the five heinous deeds with immediate result (anantarika-kamma, q.v.), while 
the defilements' refer to the ‘evil views with fixed destiny’ (niyata-micchà- 
ditthi; see ditthi). 


Abhassara: the ‘Radiant Ones’, are a class of heavenly beings of the fine- 
material world (rüpa-loka); deva. 


abhibhayatana: the eight ‘stages of mastery’, are powers to be obtained by 
means of the kasina exercises (see kasina). In the commentary to MN 77, 
where áyatana is explained by ‘means’ (karana) itis said: “The abhibhayatana 
through their counteracting may master (suppress) the adverse states, and 
by means of higher knowledge they may master the objects of mind." They 
are means for transcending the sensuous sphere. 


The text often met with in the Suttas (e.g. DN 11, 33; MN 77; AN 8:65; 10:29) 
is as follows: 


(1) “Perceiving (blue... red... yellow... white) forms on one’s own body, one 
sees forms externally, small ones, beautiful or ugly; and in mastering these 
one understands: ‘I know, I understand.’ This is the first stage of mastery. 
(2) “Perceiving forms on one’s own body, one sees forms externally, large 
ones... This is the second stage of mastery. 

(3) “Not perceiving forms on one’s own body, one sees forms externally, small 
ones... This is the third stage of mastery. 

(4) “Not perceiving forms on one’s own body, one sees forms externally, large 
ones... This is the fourth stage of mastery. 

(5) “Not perceiving forms on one’s own body, one sees forms externally, blue 
forms, forms of blue colour, blue appearance, blue lustre, and mastering 
these one understands: ‘I know, I understand’. This is the fifth stage of 
mastery.” 

(6-8) The same is repeated with yellow, red and white forms. 





4 | ABHIJJHA 


As the preparatory kasina-object for the first and second exercise one 
should choose on one’s own body a small or a large spot, beautiful or ugly, 
and thereon one should concentrate one’s full undivided attention, so that 
this object after a while reappears as a mental reflex or image (nimitta, q.v.) 
and, as it were, as something external. Such an exercise, though appearing 
quite mechanical, if properly carried out will bring about a high degree of 
mental concentration and entrance into the four absorptions (jhdna, q.v.). In 
the third and fourth exercises the monk by an external kasina-object gains 
the mental reflexes and absorptions. As objects of the remaining exercises, 
perfectly clear and radiant colours should be chosen, flowers, cloth, etc. 


A kasina-object of small size is said to be suitable for a mentally unsteady 
nature, one of a large size for a dull nature, a beautiful object for an angry 
nature, an ugly one for a lustful nature. 


In Vism V it is said: “By means of the earth-kasina one succeeds in reaching 
the stage of mastery with regard to small and large objects... By means of 
the blue-kasina one succeeds in causing blue forms to appear, in producing 
darkness, in reaching the stage of mastery with regard to beautiful and ugly 
colours, in reaching ‘deliverance through the beautiful’, etc.” (see vimokkha II, 
3). The same is also said with regard to the other colour kasinas. 


abhijjha: ‘covetousness is a synonym of lobha (see miila) and tanhd (q.v.) and 
is the eighth link of the unwholesome courses of action (see kamma-patha, Y). 


abhinibbatti: a Sutta term for rebirth; see punabbhava. 


abhififia: the six ‘higher powers’, or supernormal knowledges, consist of five 
mundane (/okiya, q.v.) powers attainable through the utmost perfection 
in mental concentration (samādhi, q.v.) and one supermundane (lokuttara, 
q.v.) power attainable through penetrating insight (vipassand, q.v.), ie., 
extinction of all cankers (asavakkhaya; see Gsava), in other words, realisation 
of arahatship or holiness. They are: (1) magical powers (iddhi-vidha), (2) 
divine ear (dibba-sota), (3) penetration of the minds of others (ceto-pariya- 
fiána),(4)remembranceofformerexistences (pubbe-nivasanussati),(5) divine 
eye (dibba-cakkhu), (6) extinction of all cankers (Gsavakkhaya). 

The stereotype text met with in all the four Sutta collections (e.g. DN 34; 
MN 4, 6, 77; AN 3:99; 5:23; SN 15:9 and Pug 271, 239) is as follows: 


(1) *Now, O Bhikkhus, the monk enjoys the various magical powers 
(iddhi-vidhda), such as being one he becomes manifold, and having become 
manifold he again becomes one. He appears and disappears. Without being 
obstructed he passes through walls and mountains, just as if through the air. 
In the earth he dives and rises up again, just as if in the water. He walks on 
water without sinking, just as if on the earth. Cross-legged he floats through 
the air, just like a winged bird. With his hand he touches the sun and moon, 
these so mighty ones, so powerful ones. Even up to the Brahma-world he 
has mastery over his body. 


(2) “With the divine ear (dibba-sota) he hears sounds both heavenly and 
human, far and near. 





ABHISAMAYA | 5 


(3) “He knows the minds of other beings (parassa ceto-pariya-fiána), of other 
persons, by penetrating them with his own mind. He knows the greedy mind 
as greedy and the non-greedy one as not greedy; knows the hating mind 
as hating and the non-hating one as not hating; knows the deluded mind 
as deluded and the non-deluded one as not deluded; knows the shrunken 
mind and the distracted one, the developed mind and the undeveloped one, 
the surpassable mind and the unsurpassable one, the concentrated mind 
and the unconcentrated one, the freed mind and the unfreed one. 


(4) “He remembers manifold former existences (pubbe-nivdsdanussati), such 
as one birth, two, three, four and five births... hundred thousand births; 
remembers many formations and dissolutions of worlds: ‘There I was, such 
name I had... and vanishing from there I entered into existence somewhere 
else... and vanishing from there I again reappeared here.’ Thus he remembers, 
always together with the marks and peculiarities, many a former existence. 
(5)Withthedivineeye(dibba-cakkhuzyathakammüpaga-fianaorcutüpapata- 
fana) the pure one, he sees beings vanishing and reappearing, low and 
noble ones, beautiful and ugly ones, sees how beings are reappearing 
according to their deeds (see karma): "These beings, indeed, followed evil 
ways in bodily actions, words and thoughts, insulted the noble ones, held 
evil views, and according to their evil views they acted. At the dissolution of 
their body, after death, they have appeared in lower worlds, in painful states 
of existence, in the world of suffering, in hell. Those other beings, however, 
are endowed with good action... have appeared in happy state of existence, 
in a heavenly world. 


(6) "Through the extinction of all cankers (asavakkhaya) even in this very life 
he enters into the possession of deliverance of mind, deliverance through 
wisdom, after having himself understood and realised it." 


4—6 appear frequently under the name of the ‘threefold (higher) knowledge’ 
(te-vijjà, q.v.). They are, however, not a necessary condition for the attainment 
of sainthood (arahatta),i.e., of the sixthabhififia. Vism XI-XII gives a detailed 
explanation of the five mundane higher powers, together with the method 


of attaining them. 


In connection with the four kinds of progress (see patipada), abhififia means 
the ‘comprehension’ achieved on attainment of the paths and fruitions. 


abhisamacarika-sila: ‘morality consisting in good behaviour’, relates 
to the external duties of a monk such as towards his superior, etc. 
“abhisamacarika-sila is a term for those moral rules other than the eight 
ending with right livelihood (i.e., fourfold right speech, threefold right 
action and right livelihood, as in the Eightfold Path)” (Vism I; see sacca 
IV, 3-5). "Impossible is it, O monks, that without having fulfilled the law of 
good behaviour, a monk could fulfil the law of genuine pure conduct" (AN 
5:21). See adibrahmacariyakasila. 


abhisamaya: 'truth-realisation', is the full and direct grasp of the Four 
Noble Truths by the stream-winner (sotapanna; see ariya-puggala). In the 





6 | ABHISANKHARA 


commentary the term is represented by ‘penetration’ (pativedha, q.v.). 
Frequently occurring as dhammabhisamaya, ‘realisation of the doctrine’. See 
SN 13 (Abhisamaya Samyutta) and Patis: Abhisamayakatha. 


abhisankhara: identical with the second link ofthe paticca-samuppdda (q.v.), 
sankhára (q.v.; under I, 1) or karma-formations. 


ability to acquire insight: see ugghatitanni, vipacitafifiü, neyya. 


abodes: vihdra (q.v.). The four divine abodes: brahma-vihara (q.v.). The nine 
abodes of beings: sattāvāsa (q.v.). 


absence: natthi-paccaya, is one of the twenty-four conditions (paccaya, q.v.). 
absorption: see jhdna. 

abstentions, the three: virati (q.v.). 

access, moment of: see javana. 

access-concentration: see samadhi. 

accumulation (of karma): dyiihana (q.v.). 

acinnaka-kamma: habitual karma; see karma. 


acinteyya: lit. "That which cannot or should not be thought, the unthinkable, 
incomprehensible, impenetrable, that which transcends the limits of thinking 
and over which therefore one should not ponder. These four unthinkables 
are: the sphere of a Buddha (buddhavisaya), of the meditative absorptions 
(jhana-visaya), of karma result (kamma-vipdaka), and brooding over the world 
(loka-cintà), especially over an absolute first beginning of it’ (see AN 4:77). 


“Therefore, O monks, do not brood over the world as to whether it is eternal 
or temporal, limited or endless... Such brooding, O monks, is senseless, has 
nothing to do with genuine pure conduct (see adibrahmacariyaka-sila), 
does not lead to aversion, detachment, extinction, nor to peace, to full 
comprehension, enlightenment and Nibbana, etc." (SN 56:41). 


acquired image (during concentration): see nimitta, samādhi, kasina. 
action: karma (q.v.). Right bodily action: sammd-kammanta; see sacca (IV.A). 


adaptability (of body, mental factors and consciousness): kammafifiatà (q.v.); 
see khandha (corporeality) and Table II. 


adaptation-knowledge: anuloma-idna (q.v.). 

adherence: pardmasa (q.v.). 

adherent: upásaka (q.v.). 

adhicitta-sikkha: ‘training in higher mentality’; see sikkhd. 


adhimokkha: ‘determination’, decision, resolve: is one of the mental 
concomitants (cetasika) and belongs to the group of mental formations 





AGATI | 7 


(sankhara-kkhandha). In MN 111, itis mentioned together with other mental 
concomitants. See Tables II, III. 


adhipafifia-dhamma-vipassana: ‘insightintothings based onhigher wisdom , 
is one of the eighteen chief kinds of insight (see vipassana). 


adhipati-paccaya: ‘predominance-condition’ is one of the twenty-four 
conditions (paccaya, q.v.); if developed, it is considered as the fourfold road 
to power (iddhi-pdda, q.v.). 


adhisila-sikkha: ‘training in higher morality’: see sikkhd. 
adhitthana, as a doctrinal term, occurs chiefly in two meanings: 


(1) ‘Foundation’: four ‘foundations’ of an arahat's mentality, mentioned and 
explained in MN 140: the foundation of wisdom (parifia), of truthfulness 
(sacca), of liberality (caga) and of peace (upasama). See also DN 33 and its 
Commentary. 


(2) ‘Determination’, resolution, in: adhitthàna-iddhi, ‘magical power of 
determination’ (see iddhi); adhitthanaparami, ‘perfection of resolution’ (see 
parami). 


adibrahmacariyaka-sila: ‘morality of genuine pure conduct’, consistsinright 
speech, right bodily action and right livelihood, forming the third, fourth and 
fifth links of the Eightfold Path (see sacca, 1V.3, 4, 5); see Vism I. In AN 2:86 it 
is said: 

“With regard to those moral states connected with and corresponding to 
the genuine pure conduct, he is morally strong, morally firm and trains 
himself in the moral rules taken upon himself. After overcoming the three 
fetters (ego-belief, sceptic doubt and attachment to mere rules and ritual; 
see samyojana) he becomes one who will be 'reborn seven times at the 
utmost’ (see sotapanna) and after only seven times more wandering through 
this round of rebirths amongst men and heavenly beings, he will put an end 
to suffering." 


adinavàanupassana-fíana: 'knowledgeconsistingincontemplationofmisery',is 
one of the eight kinds of insight (vipassana) that form the ‘purification of the 
knowledge and vision of the path-progress' (see visuddhi, VI. 4). It is further 
one of the eighteen chief kinds of insight (see vipassana). 


adosa: ‘hatelessness’, is one of the three wholesome roots (miila, q.v.). 


adukkha-m-asukha vedana: ‘feeling which is neither painful nor joyful’, i.e., 
indifferent feeling; see khandha, vedana. 


advertence (of mind to the object): avajjana, is one of the functions of 
consciousness (vififiana-kicca, q.v.). See manasikara. 


aeon: kappa (q.v.). 


agati: the four *wrong paths' are: the path of greed (chanda), of hate (dosa), of 
delusion (moha), of cowardice (bhaya). One whoisfreed fromevilimpulsesis 
no longer liable to take the wrong path of greed, etc." (AN 4:17; 9:7). 





8 | AGE, OLD 


age, old: jard (q.v.). 
aggregates: khandha (q.v.). 
agility: lahutd (q.v.). 


ahara: ‘nutriment’, ‘food’, is used in the concrete sense as material food and 
as such it belongs to derived corporeality (see khandha, Summary I.). In the 
figurative sense, as ‘foundation’ or condition, it is one of the twenty-four 
conditions (paccaya, q.v.) and is used to denote four kinds of nutriment, 
which are material and mental: 


(1) material food (kabalinkarahara), which feeds the eightfold corporeality 
having nutrient essence as its eighth factor (i.e., the solid, liquid, heat, 
motion, colour, odour, the tastable and nutrient essence; see rüpa-kalàpa). 


(2) sensorial and mental impression (phassa), is a condition for the three 
kinds of feeling (agreeable, disagreeable and indifferent); see paticca- 
samuppáda (6). 

(3) mental volition (manosaficetana) (=karma,q.v.) feeds rebirth; seepaticca- 
samuppáda (2). 

(4) consciousness (viññāna) feeds mind and corporeality; (naáma-rüpa; 
ibid., 2) at the moment of conception (Vism XI). 

Literature (on the four nutriments): MN 9 and commentary (translated in 
The Discourse on Right View, by BhikkhuNanamoli, Wheel377—379.), MN 38; 
SN 12:11, 63, 64, The Four Nutriments of Life, by Nyanaponika Thera (Wheel 
105/106). 


ahara-ja(or-samutthana)rüpa: 'food-producedcorporeality';seesamutthàna. 


ahare patikkila-safifia: ‘reflection on the loathsomeness of food’, fully 
described in Vism XI, l. 


ahetuka-citta: see hetu. 

ahetuka-ditthi: ‘view of uncausedness' (of existence); see ditthi. 
ahetu-patisandhika: see patisandhi. 

ahimsa: see avihimsa. 


ahirika-anottappa: ‘lack of moral shame and dread’, are two of the four 
unwholesome factors associated with all karmically unwholesome states of 
consciousness, the two others being restlessness (uddhacca) and delusion 
(moha). See Table II. 

“There are two sinister things, namely, lack of moral shame and dread, etc.” 
(AN 2:6). *Not to be ashamed of what one should be ashamed of; not to be 
ashamed of evil, unwholesome things: this is called lack of moral shame" 
(Pug 59). “Not to dread what one should dread... This is called lack of moral 
dread" (Pug 60). 


ahosi-kamma: ‘ineffective karma’; see karma. 


AKUPPA-CETO-VIMUTTI | 9 





ajiva: ‘livelihood’. About right and wrong livelihood, see sacca (IV. 5) and 
miccha-magga (5). 


ajiva-parisuddhi-sila: ‘morality consistinginpurificationoflivelihood’ ,isone 
of the four kinds of perfect morality; see sila. 


Akanittha: the ‘Great Ones’, i.e., ‘Highest Gods’, are the inhabitants of the fifth 
and highest heaven of the Pure Abodes (suddhdavasa, q.v.); see avacara, deva 
(ID, anagami. 


akasa: 'space', is, according to the Commentaries, of two kinds: 1. limited 
space (paricchinnakasa or paricchedakdsa), 2. endless space (anantakasa), 
i.e., cosmic space. 


(1) Limited space, under the name of ákása-dhatu (space element), belongs 
to derived corporeality (see khandha, Summary I; Dhs § 638) and to a 
sixfold classification of elements (see dhdtu; MN 112, 115, 140). It is also 
an object of kasina (q.v) meditation. It is defined as follows: “The space 
element has the characteristic of delimiting matter. Its function is to indicate 
the boundaries of matter. It is manifested as the confines of matter; or its 
manifestation consists in being untouched (by the four great elements), and 
in holes and apertures. Its proximate cause is the matter delimited. It is on 
account of the space element that one can say of material things delimited 
that ‘this is above, below, around that” (Vism XIV, 63). 


(2) In the Arthasálini endless space is called ajatákasa, *unentangled', i.e., 
unobstructed or empty space. Itis the object ofthe first immaterial absorption 
(see jhana), the sphere of boundless space (akasánaficayatana). According 
to Abhidhamma philosophy, endless space has no objective reality (being 
purely conceptual), which is indicated by the fact that it is not included in 
the triad of the wholesome (kusalatika), which comprises the entire reality. 
Later Buddhist schools have regarded it as one of several unconditioned 
or uncreated states (asankhata dharma) —a view that is rejected in the 
Kathavatthu (see Guide Ch. V § 57—59.). Theravada Buddhism recognises 
only Nibbana as an unconditioned element (asankhatadhàütu: see Dhs 


§ 1084). 
akasa-dhatu: ‘space element’; see above and dhatu. 
akasa-kasina: 'space-kasina exercise’; see kasina. 


akasanaficayatana: ‘sphere of boundless space’, is identical with the first 
absorption in the immaterial sphere; see jhana (6). 


akificafifía-ceto-vimutti: see ceto-vimutti. 
akificafifíayatana: see jhdna (7). 
akiriya-ditthi: ‘view of the inefficacy of action’; see ditthi. 


akuppa-ceto-vimutti: See ceto-vimutti. 





10 | AKUPPA-DHAMMA 


akuppa-dhamma: ‘unshakeable’, is one who has attained full mastery over 
the absorptions (jhdna, q.v.). In Pug 4 it is said: 


“What person is unshakeable? If a person gains the meditative attainments 
of the fine-material and immaterial sphere (rüpavacara-aripaávacara); and he 
gains them at his wish, without toil and exertion; and according to his wish, 
as regards place, object and duration, enters them or arises from them; then 
it is impossible that in such a person the attainments may become shaken 
through negligence. This person is unshakeable.” 


akusala: ‘unwholesome’, are all those karmic volitions (kamma-cetand; 
see cetand) and the consciousness and mental concomitants associated 
therewith, which are accompanied either by greed (/obha) or hate (dosa) or 
merely delusion (moha); and all these phenomena are causes of unfavourable 
karma results and contain the seeds of unhappy destiny or rebirth. See 
karma, paticca-samuppáda (1), Table II. 


akusala-sadharana-cetasika: ‘general unwholesome mental factors 
associated with all unwholesome actions’ (volitions), are four: (1) lack of 
moral shame (ahirika), (2) lack of moral dread (anottappa), (3) restlessness 
(uddhacca), (4) delusion (moha). For (1) and (2) see ahirika-anottappa, for (3) 
see nivarana, for (4) mila. 

The corresponding term in the field of wholesome consciousness is sobhana- 
sddhdarana-cetasika (see sobhana). 


Source note: This term is used for the first time in Abhidh-s, though 
already in Vism XIV the four cetasika in question are mentioned amongst 
the mental factors associated with each of the twelve akusala-cittas 
(Table I, 22-33), while in the Abhidhamma Pitaka (Dhs $8 365-429) 
uddhacca is found only in the last of the twelve cittas, missing in all the 
remaining eleven cittas. 


akusala-vitakka: 'unwholesome thoughts' as defined under akusala (q.v.). In 
MN 20, five methods of overcoming them are given: by changing the object, 
thinking of the evil results, paying no attention, analysing, suppressing. 


Translated in The Removal of Distracting Thoughts (Wheel 21). 
alcohol prohibition: see surameraya-majjappamadatthàna. 


alms, vow of going for; or to do so without omitting any house: see dhutariga, 
3, 4. 


alms-bowl eater, the practice of the: see dhutanga. 
alms-giving: ddna (q.v.). 
alms-goer, the practice of the: see dhutanga. 


alobha: ‘greedlessness’, is one of the three karmically wholesome roots (mila, 
q.v.). 





ANAGAMI | 11 


aloka-kasina: ‘light-kasina-exercise’; see kasina. 


Az. € 


aloka-safifia: ‘perception of light’. The recurring canonical passage reads: 
“Here the monk contemplates the perception of light. He fixes his mind to 
the perception of the day; as at daytime so at night, and as at night, so in 
the day. In this way, with a mind clear and unclouded, he develops a stage 
of mind that is full of brightness." It is one of the methods of overcoming 
drowsiness, recommended by the Buddha to Maha-Moggallana (AN 7:58). 
According to DN 33, it is conducive to the development of 'knowledge and 
vision’ (see visuddhi), and it is said to be helpful to the attainment of the 
‘divine eye’ (see abhififia). 


altruistic joy: muditd, is one of the four sublime abodes (brahma-vihdra, q.v.). 


amata (Skr amrta; Vmr to die; = Gr. ambrosia): ‘deathlessness’, ‘the 
deathless', is a term for Nibbana (q.v.), the final liberation from the wheel 
of rebirths, and therefore also from the ever-repeated deaths. According to 
popular Indian belief also the gods’ drink conferring immortality. 


amoha: ‘non-delusion’, wisdom, is one of the three karmically wholesome 
roots (müla, q.v.). 


anabhijjha: 'freedomfromcovetousness',unselfishness; seekamma-patha (II. 


8). 
anabhirati-safifia: see sabba-loke anabhirati-sannd. 


anagamti: the ‘non-returner’, is a noble disciple (ariya-puggala, q.v.) on the 
third stage of holiness. There are five classes of non-returners, as it is said 
(e.g. Pug 42-46): 

"A being, through the disappearing of the five lower fetters (samyojana, 
q.V.), reappears in a higher world (amongst the devas of the Pure Abodes, 
suddhavasa, q.v.), and without returning from that world (into the sensuous 
sphere) he there reaches Nibbana. 

(1) “He may, immediately after appearing there (in the Pure Abodes) or 
without having gone beyond half of the lifetime, attain the holy path for the 
overcoming of the higher fetters. Such a being is called 'one who reaches 
Nibbana within the first half of the life’ (antara-parinibbayi). 

(2) "Or, while living beyond half of the lifetime, or at the moment of death, he 
attains the holy path for the overcoming of the higher fetters. Such a being is 
called ‘one who reaches Nibbana after crossing half the lifetime’ (upahacca- 
parinibbayi). 

(3) “Or, with exertion he attains the holy path for the overcoming of the 
higher fetters. Such a being is called ‘one who reaches Nibbana with exertion’ 
(sasankhara-parinibbayi). 

(4) “Or, without exertion he attains the holy path for the overcoming of the 
higher fetters. Such a being is called ‘one who reaches Nibbana without 
exertion’ (asankhdara-parinibbayi). 





12 | ANALYSIS OF THE FOUR ELEMENTS 


(5) “Or, after vanishing from the heaven of the Aviha-gods (see suddhavasa), 
he appears in the heaven of the unworried (Afappa) gods. After vanishing 
from there he appears in the heaven of the clearly-visible (Sudassa) gods, 
from there in the heaven of the clear-visioned (sudassi) gods, from there in 
the heaven of the highest (Akanittha) gods. There he attains the holy path for 
the overcoming of the higher fetters. Such a being is called 'one who passes 
upstream to the highest gods’ (Uddhamsota-akanittha-gami).” 


analysis of the four elements: dhdtu-vavatthdna (q.v.). 
analytical doctrine: vibhajja-vdda (q.v.). 
analytical knowledge, the four kinds of: patisambhidà (q.v.). 


anafífiatafi-fíassamit'indriya: is one of the three supermundane senses or 
faculties; see indriya (20). 


anantara-paccaya: ‘proximity’, is one ofthe twenty-four conditions (paccaya, 
q.v.). 


anantarika-kamma: the five heinous 'actions with immediate destiny' are: 
parricide, matricide, killing an arahat (saint), wounding a Buddha, creating 
schism in the monks’ order. In AN 5:129 itis said: “There are five irascible and 
incurable men destined to the lower world and to hell, namely: the parricide,” 
etc. About the fifth see AN 10:35, 38. With regard to the first crime, it is said in 
DN 2 that if King Ajatasattu had not deprived his father of life, he would have 
reached entrance into the path of stream-entry. 


Source note: This is first used as kammāni Gnantarikdni in the 
Abhidhamma Pitaka in Dhs § 1035 and Vibh 8 941. The five crimes, 
however, are already enumerated and explained in the old Sutta texts as 
is seen above. 


anantariya: the ‘immediacy’, is a term for that concentration of mind which 
is associated with such insight (vipassand, q.v.) as is present in any one of 
the four kinds of supermundane path consciousness (see ariya-puggala), and 
which therefore is the cause of the immediately following consciousness as 
its result or ‘fruition’ (phala, q.v.). According to the Abhidhamma, the path 
(of the sotapanna, etc.) is generated by the insight into the impermanence, 
misery and impersonality of existence, flashing up at that very moment 
and transforming and ennobling one’s nature forever. It is mentioned under 
the name of Gnantarikasamdadhi in the Ratana Sutta (Sn v. 22) and in Patis: 
Nanakathà. 


anapana-sati: ‘mindfulness on in-and-out-breathing’, is one of the most 
important exercises for reaching mental concentration and the four 
absorptions (jhana, q.v.). 

In the Satipatthana Sutta (MN 10, DN 22) and elsewhere, four methods of 
practice are given, which may also serve as basis for insight meditation. The 
‘Discourse on Mindfulness of Breathing’ (Anapanasati Sutta, MN 118) and 





ANAPANA-SATI | 13 


other texts have sixteen methods of practice, which divide into four groups 
of four. The first three apply to both tranquillity (samatha, q.v.) and insight 
meditation, while the fourth refers to pure insight practice only. The second 
and the third group require the attainment of the absorptions. 


“With attentive mind he breathes in, with attentive mind he breathes out. 


(D 
(1) "When making a long inhalation he knows: ‘I make a long inhalation’; 
when making a long exhalation he knows: ‘I make a long exhalation.’ 
(2) “When making a short inhalation he knows: ‘I make a short inhalation’; 
when making a short exhalation he knows: ‘I make a short exhalation.’ 


(3) “Clearly perceiving the entire (breath-) body I will breathe in,’ thus he 
trains himself; ‘clearly perceiving the entire (breath-) body I will breathe out,’ 
thus he trains himself. 

(4) “Calming this bodily function I will breathe in,’ thus he trains himself; 
'calming this bodily function I will breathe out,' thus he trains himself. 


aD 
(5) “Feeling rapture (piti) I will breathe in,’ thus he trains himself; ‘feeling 
rapture I will breathe out,’ thus he trains himself. 


(6) “Feeling joy I will breathe in,’ thus he trains himself; ‘feeling joy I will 
breathe out,’ thus he trains himself. 

(7) Feeling the mental formation (citta-sankhara) I will breathe in,’ thus he 
trains himself, ‘feeling the mental formation I will breathe out,’ thus he trains 
himself. 

(8) “Calming the mental formation I will breathe in,’ thus he trains himself; 
‘calming the mental formation I will breathe out,’ thus he trains himself. 


(III) 
(9) Clearly perceiving the mind (citta) [willbreathein,’ thushetrains himself; 
‘clearly perceiving the mind I will breathe out,’ thus he trains himself. 
(10)““Gladdening the mindIwillbreathein,’ thushetrainshimself; ‘gladdening 
the mind I will breathe out,’ thus he trains himself. 
(11) “Concentrating the mind I will breathe in,’ thus he trains himself; 
‘concentrating the mind I will breathe out,’ thus he trains himself. 
(12) “Freeing the mind I will breathe in,’ thus he trains himself; ‘freeing the 
mind I will breathe out,’ thus he trains himself. 


(IV) 
(13) “Reflecting on impermanence (anicca) I will breathe in,’ thus he trains 


himself; ‘reflecting on impermanence I will breathe out,’ thus he trains 
himself. 


(14) “Reflecting on detachment (virdga) I will breathe in,’ thus he trains 
himself; ‘reflecting on detachment I will breathe out,’ thus he trains himself. 





14 | ANATTA 


(15) “Reflecting on extinction (nirodha) I will breathe in,’ thus he trains 
himself; ‘reflecting on extinction I will breathe out,’ thus he trains himself. 


(16) “Reflecting on abandonment (patinissagga) I will breathe in,’ thus he 
trains himself; ‘reflecting on abandonment I will breathe out,’ thus he trains 
himself." 


In MN 118 itis further shown how these sixteen exercises bring about the four 
foundations of mindfulness (satipatthana, q.v.), namely: 1—4 contemplation 
of the body, 5-8 contemplation of feeling, 9-12 contemplation of mind 
(consciousness), 13-16 contemplation of mind objects. Then it is shown 
how these four foundations of mindfulness bring about the seven factors of 
enlightenment (bojjhanga, q.v.); then these again deliverance of mind (ceto- 


vimutti, q.v.) and deliverance through wisdom (pafifia-vimutti, q.v.). 


Literature: Anapanasati Samyutta (SN 54). Patis: Anapanakatha. 

Full explanation of practice in Vism VIII, 145ff. For a comprehensive 
anthology of canonical and commentarial texts, see Mindfulness of 
Breathing, Nanamoli Thera (BPS, 1964). 


anatta: ‘non-self’, non-ego, egolessness, impersonality, is the last of the 
three characteristics of existence (ti-lakkhana, q.v.). The anattà doctrine 
teaches that neither within the bodily and mental phenomena of existence, 
nor outside of them, can be found anything that in the ultimate sense could 
be regarded as a self-existing real ego-entity, soul or any other abiding 
substance. This is the central doctrine of Buddhism, without understanding 
which a real knowledge of Buddhism is altogether impossible. It is the 
only really specific Buddhist doctrine, with which the entire structure of 
the Buddhist teaching stands or falls. All the remaining Buddhist doctrines 
may, more or less, be found in other philosophic systems and religions, but 
the anattd-doctrine has been clearly and unreservedly taught only by the 
Buddha, wherefore the Buddha is known as the anattd-vddi, or ‘Teacher 
of Impersonality’. Whosoever has not penetrated this impersonality of all 
existence, and does not comprehend that in reality there exists only this 
continually self-consuming process of arising and passing bodily and mental 
phenomena, and that there is no separate ego-entity within or without this 
process, he will not be able to understand Buddhism, i.e., the teaching of 
the Four Noble Truths (sacca, q.v.), in the right light. He will think that 
it is his ego, his personality, that experiences suffering, his personality 
that performs good and evil actions and will be reborn according to these 
actions, his personality that will enter into Nibbana, his personality that 
walks on the Eightfold Path. Thus it is said in Vism XVI: 


“Mere suffering exists, no sufferer is found; 

The deeds are, but no doer of the deeds is there; 
Nibbana is, but not the man that enters it; 

The path is, but no traveller on it is seen.” 


“Whosoever is not clear with regard to the conditionally arisen phenomena, 
and does not comprehend that all the actions are conditioned through 
ignorance, etc., he thinks that it is an ego that understands or does not 


ANICCA | 15 





understand, that acts or causes to act, that comes to existence at rebirth... 
that has the sense-impression, that feels, desires, becomes attached, 
continues and at rebirth again enters a new existence” (Vism XVII, 117). 


While in the case of the first two characteristics it is stated that all 
formations (sabbe sankhara) are impermanent and subject to suffering, the 
corresponding text for the third characteristic states that “all things are non- 
self” (sabbe dhamma anatta; MN 35, Dhp 279). This emphasises that the false 
view of an abiding self or substance is neither applicable to any ‘formation’ 
or conditioned phenomenon, nor to Nibbana, the Unconditioned Element 
(asankhata dhatu). 


The Anatta-lakkhana Sutta, the ‘Discourse on the Characteristic of Non-self’, 
was the second discourse after Enlightenment, preached by the Buddha 
to his first five disciples, who after hearing it attained to perfect holiness 
(arahatta). 


The contemplation of non-self (anattanupassand) leads to the emptiness 
liberation (sufifiatà-vimokkha, see vimokkha). Herein the faculty of wisdom 
(pafifündriya) is outstanding; and one who attains in that way the path 
of stream-entry is called a Dhamma devotee (dhammdanusdri; see ariya- 
puggala); at the next two stages of sainthood he becomes a vision-attainer 
(ditthippatta); and at the highest stage, i.e., holiness, he is called “liberated by 
wisdom’ (paiifia-vimutta). 
For further details, see paramattha-sacca, paticca-samuppada, khandha, ti- 
lakkhana, nàma-rüpa, patisandhi. 
Literature: Anatta-lakkhana Sutta, Vinayal, 13—14; SN 22:59; translatedin 
Three Cardinal Discourses of the Buddha (Wheel 17). Another important 
text on anattd is the Discourse on the Snake Simile (Alagaddüpama Sutta, 
MN 22; translated in Wheel 48/49). Other texts in PD. Further: Anattá and 
Nibbana, by Nyanaponika Thera (Wheel 11); The Truth of Anatta, by Dr. 
G.P. Malalasekera (Wheel 94); The Three Basic Facts of Existence ‘Part III: 
Egolessness' (Wheel 202/204). 


anattanupassana: ‘contemplation of non-self’ is one of the eighteen chief 
kinds of insight (see vipassana). See also anattà. 


anatta-safifia: ‘perception of non-self'; see AN 6:104; AN 7:48; AN 
10:60; Ud 4.1. 


anatta-vada: the doctrine of impersonality'; see anattà. 


anefija: 'imperturbability', denotes the immaterial sphere (ariipdvacara; 
see avacara); see sankhdra. See MN 106. 


anger: see mila. 


anicca: ‘impermanent’ (or, as abstract noun, aniccatd, ‘impermanence’ ) is 
the first of the three characteristics of existence (ti-lakkhana, q.v.). It is from 
the fact of impermanence that, in most texts, the other two characteristics, 
suffering (dukkha) and non-self (anattà), are derived (SN 22:15; Ud 4, 1). 


"Impermanency of things is the rising, passing and changing of things, or 
the disappearance of things that have become or arisen. The meaning is 





16 | ANICCANUPASSANA 


that these things never persist in the same way, but that they are vanishing 
dissolving from moment to moment” (Vism VII, 3). 


Impermanency is a basic feature of all conditioned phenomena, be they 
material or mental, coarse or subtle, one’s own or external: “All formations 
are impermanent" (sabbe sankharad anicca; MN 35, Dhp 277). That the 
totality of existence is impermanent is also often stated in terms of the five 
aggregates (khandha, q.v.), the twelve personal and external sense bases 
(ayatana q.v.), etc. Only Nibbana (q.v), which is unconditioned and not a 
formation (asarkhata), is permanent (nicca, dhuva). 


The insight leading to the first stage of deliverance, stream-entry (sotapatti; 
seeariya-puggala),isoftenexpressedinterms of impermanence: “Whateveris 
subject to origination, is subject to cessation” (see Dhammacakkappavattana 
Sutta, SN 46:11). In his last exhortation, before his parinibbàána, the Buddha 
reminded his monks of the impermanence of existence as a spur to earnest 
effort: “Behold now, bhikkhus, I exhort you: Formations are bound to vanish. 
Strive earnestly!” (vayadhamma sankhard, appamddena sampádetha; DN 16). 


Without the deep insight into the impermanency and insubstantiality of 
all phenomena of existence there is no attainment of deliverance. Hence 
comprehension of impermanency gained by direct meditative experience 
heads two lists of insight knowledge: (a) contemplation of impermanency 
(aniccánupassanád) is the first of the eighteen chief kinds of insight (q.v.); (b) the 
contemplation ofarising and vanishing (udayabbayanupassana-fiána)isthe first 
of nine kinds of knowledge which lead to the ‘purification by knowledge and 
vision of the path-progress’ (see visuddhi, VI). Contemplation of impermanency 
leads to the conditionless deliverance (animitta-vimokkha; see vimokkha). As 
herein the faculty of confidence (saddhindriya) is outstanding, he who attains 
in that way the path of stream-entry is called a faith-devotee (saddhanusari; 
see ariya-puggala) and at the seven higher stages he is called faith-liberated 
(saddhà-vimutta). See also anicca-safifía. 


See The Three Basic Facts of Existence I: Impermanence (Wheel 186/187). 


aniccanupassana: ‘contemplation of impermanency’, is one of the eighteen 
chief kinds of insight (see vipassana). 


anicca-safífía: ‘perception of impermanency’, is defined in the Girimananda 
Sutta (AN 10:60) as meditation on the impermanency of the five groups of 
existence. 


“Though, with a faithful heart, one takes refuge in the Buddha, his Teaching 
and the Community of Monks; or with a faithful heart observes the rules of 
morality; or develops a mind full of loving kindness; far more meritorious it 
is if one cultivates the perception of impermanency, be it only for a moment" 
(AN 10:20). 


See AN 6:102; AN 7:48; Ud 4.1; SN 22:102. 
animitta-ceto-vimutti: see ceto-vimutti. 
animittanupassana: see vipassand. 


animitta-vimokkha: see vimokkha. 





ANUPASSANA | 17 


afifia: ‘other’, being of the opposite category. 


afifia: ‘highest knowledge’, gnosis, refers to the perfect knowledge of the 
saint (arahat; see ariya-puggala). The following passage occurs frequently 
in the Suttas, when a monk indicates his attainment of holiness (arahatta): 
“He makes known highest knowledge (afifiam vyakaroti), thus: ‘Rebirth has 
ceased, fulfilled is the holy life, the task is accomplished, and there is no more 
of this to come.” 

The ‘faculty of highest knowledge’ (aññ indriya = afifia-indriya; see indriya), 
however, is present in six of the eight stages of holiness, that is, beginning 
with the fruition of stream-winning (sotdpatti-phala) up to the path of 
holiness (arahatta-magga). See Dhs (PTS) §§ 362—364, 505, 553; Indriya 
Vibhanga; PD § 162. 


afifiamafifia-paccaya: ‘mutuality-condition,’ is one of the twenty-four 
conditions (paccaya, q.v.). 


afifiatavindriya: ‘the faculty of one who knows’; see indriya, 22. 
afifiindriya: ‘the faculty of highest knowledge’; see aññā and indriya, 21. 
anottappa: see ahirika. 

answering questions, four ways of: see paiiha-byükarana. 
antara-parinibbayi: one of the five kinds of non-returners or anāgāmī (q.v.). 
antinomies: see ditthi. 


anuloma-citta: 'adaptation-moment of consciousness', denotes the third of 
the four moments of impulsion (javana, q.v.) flashing up immediately before 
either reaching the absorptions (jhdna, q.v.) or the supermundane paths 
(see ariya-puggala). These four moments of impulsion are: the preparation 
(parikamma), access (upacára), adaptation (anuloma) and maturity (gotrabhii) 
moments. For further details, see javana, gotrabhü. 


anuloma-fiana: 'adaptation-knowledge' orconformity-knowledge,isidentical 
with the 'adaptation-to-truth knowledge’, the last of nine insight-knowledges 
(vipassand-fidna) which constitute the purification of knowledge and vision 
of the path-progress (see visuddhi VI, 9). See Vism XXI. 


anupadisesa-nibbana: see Nibbana, upādi. 


anupassana: ‘contemplation’. Fourfold: see satipatthana. 1. Eightfold: 
see vipassana. Sevenfold: “The seven contemplations: (1) Contemplating 
(formations) as impermanent, one abandons the perception of permanency. 
(2) Contemplating (them) as painful, one abandons the perception of 
happiness (to be found in them). (3) Contemplating (them) as not self, one 
abandons the perception of self. (4) Becoming dispassionate, one abandons 
delighting. (5) Causing fading away, one abandons greed. (6) Causing 
cessation, one abandons originating. (7) Relinquishing, one abandons 
grasping” (Patis I, p. 58). See also Vism XXI, 43; XXII, 114. 





18 | ANUPUBBA-NIRODHA 


anupubba-nirodha: the nine ‘successive extinctions’, are the eight extinctions 
reached through the eight absorptions (jhdna, q.v.) and the extinction of 
feeling and perception (see nirodha-samapatti), as it is said in AN 9:31 and 
DN 33: 


"In him who has entered the first absorption, the sensuous perceptions (kama- 
safifia) are extinguished. Having entered the second absorption, thought- 
conception and discursive thinking (vitakkavicdra, q.v.) are extinguished. 
Having entered the third absorption, rapture (piti, q.v.) is extinguished. 
Having entered the fourth absorption, in-and-out breathing (assasapassása, 
q.v.) are extinguished. Having entered the sphere of boundless space 
(akasanaficayatana), the corporeality perceptions (rüpa-saiifía) are 
extinguished. Having entered the sphere of boundless consciousness 
(vififianaficayatana), the perception of the sphere of boundless space is 
extinguished. Having entered the sphere of nothingness (akificafifiayatana), 
the perception of the sphere of boundless consciousness is extinguished. 
Having entered the sphere of neither-perception-nor-non-perception 
(neva-safifianásafifiayatana) the perception of the sphere of nothingness 
is extinguished. Having entered the extinction of perception and feeling 
(safifiavedayitanirodha) perception and feeling are extinguished.” For further 
details, see jhana, nirodha-samapatti. 


anupubba-vihara: the nine 'successive abodes', are identical with the 
nine anupubba-nirodha (see above). In AN 9:33 they are called successive 
attainments (anupubba-samapatti). 


anupubbi-katha: ‘gradual instruction’, progressive sermon; given by the 
Buddha when it was necessary to prepare first the listeners mind before 
speaking to him on the advanced teaching of the Four Noble Truths. The 
stock passage (e.g. DN 3; DN 14; MN 56) runs as follows: 


"Then the Blessed One gave him a gradual instruction — that is to say, he 
spoke on liberality (‘giving , dana, q.v.), on moral conduct (sila) and on the 
heavens (sagga); he explained the peril, the vanity and the depravity of 
sensual pleasures, and the advantages of renunciation. When the Blessed One 
perceived that the listeners mind was prepared, pliant, free from obstacles, 
elevated and lucid, then he explained to him that exalted teaching particular 
to the Buddhas (Buddhànam sGmukkamsika desanā), that is: suffering, its 
cause, its ceasing, and the path.” 


anurakkhana-padhana: the ‘effort to maintain’ wholesome states; see 
padhana. 


anusaya: the seven ‘proclivities’, inclinations, or tendencies are: sensuous 
greed (kama-ràga; see samyojana), grudge (patigha), speculative opinion 
(ditthi, q.v.), sceptical doubt (vicikicchd, q.v.), conceit (mana, q.v.), craving for 
continued existence (bhavardga), ignorance (avijjd, q.v.) (DN 33; AN 7:11,12). 


“These things are called ‘proclivities’ since, in consequence of their 





ANUSSATI | 19 


pertinacity, they ever and again tend to become the conditions for the 
arising of ever new sensuous greed, etc.” (Vism XXII, 60). 


Yam VII first determines in which beings such and such proclivities exist, and 
which proclivities, and with regard to what, and in which sphere of existence. 
Thereafter it gives an explanation concerning their overcoming, their 
penetration, etc. See Guide Ch. VI§ VII. According to the Kathavatthu, several 
ancient Buddhist schools erroneously held the opinion that the anusayas, as 
such, meant merely latent, hence karmically neutral qualities, which however 
contradicts the Theravada conception. See Guide Ch. V § 88, 108, 139. 


anussati: ‘recollection’, meditation, contemplation. The six recollections 
often described in the Suttas (e.g. AN 6:10, 25; DN 33) are: (1) recollection 
of the Buddha, (2) his Doctrine, (3) his community of noble disciples, (4) of 
morality, (5) liberality, (6) heavenly beings (buddhanussati, dhammanussati, 
sanghanussati, silanussati, caganussati, devatanussati). 


(1) “The noble disciple, Mahanama, recollects thus: ‘This Blessed One is holy, 
a fully Enlightened One, perfected in wisdom and conduct, faring happily, 
knower of the worlds, unsurpassed leader of men to be trained, teacher of 
heavenly beings and men, a Buddha, a Blessed One.’ 


(2) ‘Well proclaimed by the Blessed One is the Doctrine (dhamma), directly 
visible, with immediate fruit, inviting investigation, leading on to Nibbana, 
to be comprehended by the wise, each by himself.’ 


(3) ‘Of good conduct is the Community (Sangha) of the Blessed One’s 
disciples, of upright conduct, living on the right path, performing their 
duties, to wit: the four pairs of men or eight individuals (see ariya-puggala). 
This Community of the Blessed One’s disciples is worthy of offerings, worthy 
of hospitality, worthy of gifts, worthy of reverence with raised hands, the 
unsurpassed field for doing meritorious deeds.’ 


(4) “The noble disciple further recollects his own morality (sila) which 
is unbroken, without any breach, undefiled, untarnished, conducive to 
liberation, praised by the wise, not dependent (on craving or opinions), 
leading to concentration. 


(5) “The noble disciple further recollects his own liberality (cága) thus: 
‘Blessed truly am I, highly blessed am I who, amongst beings defiled with the 
filth of stinginess, live with heart free from stinginess, liberal, open-handed, 
rejoicing in giving, ready to give anything asked for, glad to give and share 
with others.’ 

(6) “The noble disciple further recollects the heavenly beings (devatà): 
‘There are the heavenly beings of the retinue of the Four Great Kings, the 
heavenly beings of the World of the Thirty-Three, the Yamadevas... and 
there are heavenly beings besides (see deva). Such faith, such morality, such 
knowledge, such liberality, such insight, possessed of which those heavenly 
beings, after vanishing from here, are reborn in those worlds, such things are 
also found in me.” (AN 3:70; 6:10; 11:12) 





20 | APARAPARIYA-VEDANIYA-KAMMA 


"At the time when the noble disciple recollects the Perfect One... at such a 
time his mind is neither possessed of greed, nor of hate, nor of delusion. Quite 
upright at such a time is his mind owing to the Perfect One... With upright 
mind the noble disciple attains understanding of the sense, understanding 
of the law, attains joy through the law. In the joyous one rapture arises. 
With heart enraptured, his whole being becomes stilled. Stilled within his 
being, he feels happiness; and the mind of the happy one becomes firm. 
Of this noble disciple it is said that amongst those gone astray, he walks on 
the right path, among those suffering he abides free from suffering. Thus 
having reached the stream of the law, he develops the recollection of the 
Enlightened One..." (AN 6:10). 


In AN 1:21 (PTS: I, xvi) and AN 1:27 (PTS: I, xx, 2) another four recollections 
are added: mindfulness on death (marandnussati, q.v.), on the body 
(kayagatàsati, q.v.), on breathing (anapana-sati, q.v.), and the recollection of 
peace (upasamanussati, q.v.). 


The first six recollections are fully explained in Vism VII, the latter four in 
Vism VIII. 


aparapariya-vedaniya-kamma: ‘karma bearing fruits in later births’; see 
karma. 


aparihana-dhamma: ‘incapable of relapse’, or ‘of falling away’, namely, with 
regard to deliverance from some or all fetters of existence (see samyojana). 
Thus all noble disciples are called, i.e., all those who have attained any of 
the four noble paths to holiness (see ariya-puggala). With regard to the 
absorptions (jhàna, q.v.), anyone is called ‘unrelapsable’ who has attained full 
mastery over the absorptions. See AN 6:62; Pug 6. See akuppa-dhamma. 


aparihaniya-dhamma: 'conditionsof welfare" (lit.ofnon-decline),forarepublic. 
Seven such conditions are mentioned in the Maha-Parinibbana Sutta (DN 
16). They are followed by five sets of seven, and one set of six conditions, 
conducive to the welfare of the Community of Monks, the Sangha. Identical 
texts at AN 7:20—25. To be distinguished from the preceding term. 


apaya: the four ‘lower worlds’, i.e., the world of animals, of ghosts, of demons, 
and hell. See Vism XIII, 92ff. 


apo-dhatu: *water-element' ; see dhdtu. 


appamada: ‘zeal’, non-laxity, earnestness, diligence, is considered the 
foundation of all progress. 


"Just as all the footprints of living beings are surpassed by the footprint of 
the elephant, and the footprint of the elephant is considered as the mightiest 
amongst them, just so have all the meritorious qualities zeal as their 
foundation, and zeal is considered as the mightiest of these qualities" (AN 
10:15). 

See the Chapter on Zeal (Appamada Vagga) in Dhp, and the Buddhas last 
exhortation: "Transient are all formations. Strive zealously!” (appamádena 
sampddetha, DN 16). In the commentaries, it is often explained as the 
presence (lit. ‘non-absence’) of mindfulness (satiyàá avippavása). 





ARIYA | 21 


Appamanabha: a kind of heavenly being; see deva (II). 
appamana-ceto-vimutti: see ceto-vimutti. 
Appamana-subha: a kind of heavenly being; see deva (II). 


appamafifia: the four ‘boundless states’, identical with brahma-vihara (q.v.). 


appana-samadhi: ‘attainment concentration’ or ‘full concentration’ (from 
appeti, to fix), is the concentration existing during absorption (jhàna, q.v.), 
while the neighbourhood or access-concentration (upacára-samadhi) only 
approaches the first absorption without attaining it; see samādhi. 


appanihita-vimokkha: see vimokkha. 
appanihitanupassana: see vipassaná. 
appendants, the three: kificana (q.v.). 


appicchata: ‘having only few wishes’ ,contentedness. Oneoftheindispensable 
virtues of the monk; see AN 10:181—190, and ariyavamsa (q.v.). 
apufifiabhisankhara: see sarkhàra. 

arahat and arahatta-magga, -phala: see ariya-puggala. 


arammana: ‘object’. There are six: visible object, sound, odour, taste, body- 
impression, mind-object. The mind-object (dhammdrammana) may be 
physical or mental, past, present or future, real or imaginary. The five sense- 
objects belong to the corporeality-group (rüpakkhandha; see khandha). They 
form the external foundations for the sense-perceptions, and without them 
no sense-perception or sense-consciousness (seeing, hearing, etc.) can arise. 
See dyatana, paccaya. 


Source note: In the meaning of sense-object, first found in the 
Dhammasangani of the Abhidhamma Canon. See paccaya 2. 


arammanadhipati, arammanupanissaya: see paccaya. 


arafifiikanga: the ‘exercise of the forest-dweller’, is one of the ascetic 
purification-exercises (dhutariga, q.v.). 


arising and vanishing (of things) the knowledge consisting in the 
contemplation of; see visuddhi (VI. 1.). 


ariya-iddhi: see iddhi. 
ariya-magga: see ariya-puggala. 
ariya-puggala, or simply ariya: ‘Noble Ones’, ‘noble persons’. 


(A) The eight ariya-puggala are those who have realised one of the eight 
stages of holiness, i.e., the four supermundane paths (magga) and the four 
supermundane fruitions (phala) of these paths. There are four pairs: 


la. The one realising the path of stream-winning (sotapattimagga). 





22 | ARIYA 


lb. The one realising the fruition of stream-winning (sotdpattiphala). 
2a. The one realising the path of once-return (sakadagdmimagga). 
2b. The one realising the fruition of once-return (sakadagamiphala). 
3a. The one realising the path of non-return (andgdmimagga). 

3b. The one realising the fruition of non-return (anágamiphala). 

4a. The one realising the path of holiness (arahatta-magga). 

4b. The one realising the fruition of holiness (arahatta-phala). 


Summed up, there are four noble individuals (ariya-puggala): the stream-winner 
(sotapanna), the once-returner (sakadágani), the non-returner (andgami), the 
holy one (arahat). 


In AN 8:10 and AN 9:16 the gotrabhü (q.v.) is listed as the ninth noble individual. 


According to the Abhidhamma, ‘supermundane path’, or simply ‘path’ (magga), 
is a designation of the moment of entering into one of the four stages of holiness 
—Nibbana being the object — produced by intuitional insight (vipassana) into 
the impermanence, misery and impersonality of existence, flashing forth and 
forever transforming one’s life and nature. By ‘fruition’ (phala) is meant those 
moments of consciousness which follow immediately thereafter as the result of 
the path, and which in certain circumstances may repeat for innumerable times 
during the lifetime. 


(1) Through the path of stream-winning (sotapattimagga) one ‘becomes’ 
free (whereas in realising the fruition, one ‘is’ free) from the first three fetters 
(samyojana, q.v.) which bind beings to existence in the sensuous sphere, to wit: 
(1) personality-belief (sakkaya-ditthi; see ditthi), (2) sceptical doubt (vicikiccha, 
q.v), (3) attachment to mere rules and rituals (silabbata-paramdsa; see upadana). 
(2) Through the path of once-return (sakadagámimagga) one becomes nearly 
free from the fourth and fifth fetters, to wit: (4) sensuous craving (kamacchanda 
= kama-raga; see raga), (5) ill will (vyapada = dosa; see müla). 

(3) Through the path of non-return (anágamimagga) one becomes fully free 
from the above-mentioned five lower fetters. 


(4) Through the path of holiness (arahattamagga) one further becomes free 
from the five higher fetters, to wit: (6) craving for fine material existence (riipa- 
raga),(7)craving forimmaterialexistence. (ariipa-raga),(8)conceit(mana,q.v.), 
(9) restlessness (uddhacca, q.v.), (10) ignorance (avijjd, q.v.). 


The stereotype Sutta text runs as follows: 


(1) “After the disappearance of the three fetters, the monk has won the 
stream (to Nibbana) and is no more subject to rebirth in lower worlds, is 
firmly established, destined for full enlightenment. 


(2) “After the disappearance of the three fetters and reduction of greed, 
hatred and delusion, he will return only once more; and having once more 
returned to this world, he will put an end to suffering. 


(3) “After the disappearance of the five fetters he appears in a higher world, 
and there he reaches Nibbana without ever returning from that world (to the 
sensuous sphere). 





ARIYA-VIHARA | 23 


(4) "Through the extinction of all cankers (Gsavakkhaya) he reaches already in 
this very life the deliverance of mind, the deliverance through wisdom, which 
is free from cankers, and which he himself has understood and realised.” 
For the various classes of stream-winners and non-returners, see sotüpanna, 
anagami. 

(B) The sevenfold grouping of the noble disciples is defined and explained in 
Vism XXI, 73 as follows: 


(1) the faith-devotee (saddhdnusdri): “He who is filled with resolution 
(adhimokkha) and, in considering the formations as impermanent (anicca), 
gains the faculty of faith, he, at the moment of the path to stream-winning (AN 
1) is called a faith-devotee (saddhanusari)’; 


(2) the faith-liberated one (saddhdvimutta): “At the seven higher stages (AN 
2-8) he is called a faith-liberated one"; 

(3) the body-witness (kaya-sakkhi): “He who is filled with tranquillity and, 
in considering the formations as miserable (dukkha), gains the faculty of 
concentration, he in every respect is considered as a body-witness"; 


(4) the both-ways-liberated one (ubhato-bhaga-vimutta): “He, however, who 
after reaching the absorptions of the immaterial sphere has attained the 
highest fruition (of holiness), he is a both-ways-liberated one"; 


(5) the Dhamma-devotee (dhammanusáari): “He who is filled with wisdom and, 
in considering the formations as non-self (anattd), gains the faculty of wisdom, 
he is at the moment of stream-winning a Dhamma-devotee"; 


(6) the vision-attainer (ditthippatta): “At the later stages (AN 2—7) a vision- 
attainer"; 


(7) the wisdom-liberated one (pafiiia-vimutta): "At the highest stage (AN 8) a 
wisdom-liberated one (pafiíia-vimutta)". 


Further details about the body-witness, the both-ways-liberated one, and 
the wisdom-liberated one, see under the three Pali terms. See also MN 70; 
AN 9:44; SN 12:70; Patis II, p. 33, PTS. 


ariya-sacca: the Four *Noble Truths'; see sacca. 


ariya-vamsa: the four ‘noble lineages’ of the monk; contentedness with any 
robe, contentedness with any alms-food, contentedness with any dwelling, 
and delight in meditation and detachment. In the Ariyavamsa Sutta, (AN 4:28) 
and similarly in DN 33, it is said: 


“Now the monk is contented with any robe, with any alms-food, with any 
dwelling, finds pleasure and enjoyment in mental training and detachment. 
But neither is he haughty on that account, nor does he look down upon 
others. Now, of a monk who herein is fit and indefatigable, who remains 
clearly conscious and mindful, of such a monk it is said that he is firmly 
established in the ancient, noble usages known as the most lofty ones.” Full 
translation of Ariyavamsa Sutta in Wheel 83/84. 


ariya-vihara: see vihara. 





24 | ARUPA-BHAVA 


arüpa-bhava: see bhava, loka. 
arüpajjhana: see jhdna. 


arüpakkhandha: the four ‘immaterial groups’ of existence are feeling, 
perception, mental formations, and consciousness; see khandha. 


arüpavacara: see avacara. 
aruppa: see jhàna. 


asankhara-parinibbayi: the ‘one reaching Nibbana without exertion’; one of 
the five classes of non-returners (andgdami, q.v.). 


asankharika-citta: an Abhidhamma term signifying a ‘state of consciousness 
arisen spontaneously’, ie., without previous deliberation, preparation, 
or prompting by others; hence ‘unprepared, unprompted’. This term and 
its counterpart (sasankhdrika-citta, q.v.), probably go back to a similar 
distinction made in the Suttas (AN 4:171; PD § 184). See Table I; examples in 
Vism XIV, 84 ff. 


asankhata: the ‘unformed, unoriginated, or unconditioned’ is a term for 
Nibbana, the beyond of all becoming and conditionality. 


Asaiifia-satta: ‘unconscious beings’, a class of heavenly beings in the fine- 
material world; see deva (II). “There are, O monks, heavenly beings known as 
the unconscious ones. As soon, however, as in those beings consciousness 
arises, those beings will vanish from that world. Now, O monks, it may happen 
that one of those beings after vanishing from that world, may reappear in 
this world..." (DN 24). For further details, see Kath, Yam (Guide, Ch. V § 32, 
153; Ch. VI § II ff.). 


asava: (lit. influxes) ‘cankers’, taints, corruptions, intoxicant biases. There is a 
list of four (as in DN 16, Patis, Vibh): the canker of sense-desire (kamdsava), of 
(desiring eternal) existence (bhavasava), of (wrong) views (ditthasava), and of 
ignorance (avijjasava). A list of three, omitting the canker of views, is possibly 
older and is more frequent in the Suttas, e.g., in MN 2; MN 9; DN 33; AN 3:59, 
67; AN 6:63. In the Vibhanga (Khuddakavatthu Vibh) both the threefold and 
fourfold division are mentioned. The fourfold division also occurs under the 
name of ‘floods’ (ogha) and ‘yokes’ (yoga). 

Through the path of stream-entry, the canker of views is destroyed; through 
the path of non-returning, the canker of sense-desire; through the path of 
arahatship, the cankers of existence and ignorance. MN 2 shows how to 
overcome the cankers, namely, through insight, sense-control, avoidance, 
wise use of the necessities of life, etc. For a commentarial exposition, see 
AsTr 63ff, 475ff. 


Khinásava, ‘one whose cankers are destroyed’, or ‘one who is canker-free’, is 
a term for the arahat or holy one. The state of arahatship is frequently called 
asavakkhaya, ‘the destruction of the cankers'. Suttas concluding with the 
attainment of arahatship by the listeners, often end with the words, “During 





ASUBHA | 25 


this utterance, the hearts of the Bhikkhus were freed from the cankers 
through clinging no more” (anupàdaya asavehi cittani vimuccimsi ti). 


asavakkhaya: see Gsava. 
ascending insight: see vutthüna-gámini-vipassaná. 
ascetic purification practices: see dhutanga. 


asekha: (lit.: ‘non-learner’; see sekha) a disciple ‘perfected in training’, one 
beyond training, an adept. This is a term for the arahat, the holy one (see 
ariya-puggala), since he has reached the perfection in higher moral training, 
higher mind training and higher wisdom training (see sikkhda), and needs no 
longer to train himself therein. 


asevana-paccaya: ‘repetition’, is one of the twenty-four conditions (paccaya, 
q.v.). 


asmi-mana: (lit.: ‘I am’-conceit) 'ego-conceit , may range from the coarsest 
pride and self-assertion to a subtle feeling of one's distinctiveness or 
superiority that persists, as the eighth fetter (samyojana, q.v.), until the 
attainment of arahatship or holiness. It is based upon the comparison of 
oneself with others, and may, therefore, manifest itself also as a feeling of 
inferiority or the claim to be equal (see mana). It has to be distinguished from 
‘ego-belief’ (sakkaya-ditthi, q.v.) whichimpliesa definite belief or view (ditthi) 
concerning the assumption of a self or soul, and, being the first of the fetters, 
disappears at attainment of stream-entry (sotapatti; see ariya-puggala). 


“Even when the five lower fetters have vanished in a noble disciple, there is 
still in him, with regard to the five groups of clinging, a slight undiscarded 
measure of the conceit ‘I am’, of the will ‘I am’, of the proclivity ‘I am” (SN 
22:89). See māna. 


assasa-passasa: ‘in-and-out-breathing’, are corporeal or physical functions 
or ‘formations’ (kdya-sankhara), while thought-conception and discursive 
thinking (vitakka and vicára) are called verbal functions (vaci-sankhara); 
see sankhdra (2). In-and-out-breathing forms one of the six aspects of the 
wind-element (see dhdtu). See MN 62. 


association: sampayutta-paccaya, is one of the twenty-four conditions 
(paccaya, q.v.). 


asubha: ‘impurity’, loathsomeness, foulness. In Vism VI, it is the cemetery 
contemplations (smvathika, q.v.) that are called ‘meditation-subjects of 
impurity’ (asubha-kammatthana; see bhāvanā). Inthe Girimananda Sutta (AN 
10:50), however, the perception of impurity (asubha-safifia) refers to the 
contemplation of the thirty-two parts of the body (see kaya-gatà-sati). The 
contemplation of the body's impurity is an antidote against the hindrance of 
sense-desire (see nivarana) and the mental perversion (vipallàsa, q.v.) which 
sees what is truly impure as pure and beautiful. See SN 46:51; AN 5:36; Dhp 7, 
8; Sn 193ff.; also The Five Mental Hindrances (Wheel 26). 





26 | ASURA 


asura: demons’, titans, evil ghosts, inhabiting one of the lower worlds 
(apaya, q.v.). 


Atappa: ‘the unworried', is the name of a class of deities (see deva,) inhabiting 
the first of the five Pure Abodes (suddhdvasa, q.v.), in which the anadgami(q.v.) 
has his last rebirth. 


atimana: ‘superiority-conceit’; see māna. 


atta: ‘self’, ‘ego’, ‘personality’ ,isin Buddhismamereconventionalexpression 
(vohara-desand), and no designation for anything really existing; 
see paramattha-desaná, anatta, puggala, satta, jiva. 


attachments: see pardmasa. 

atta-ditthi (-vdda): ‘ego-belief’, ‘personality-belief’; see ditthi. 
attainment-concentration: appand-samddhi (q.v.); see samadhi. 
attainments, the eight: see samápatti. 


atta-kilamatha: ‘self-mortification’, is one of the two extremes to be avoided, 
the other extreme being addiction to sensual pleasures (kama-sukha), while 
the Noble Eightfold Path constitutes the Middle Path (majjhima patipada, 
q.v.). See the Buddhas first sermon, “The Establishment of the Realm of 
Dhamma" (Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta). 


atta-safifia (atta-safiiià citta, atta-sannd ditthi): ‘perception (consciousness, 
view) of an ego’, is one of the four perversions (vipalldsa, q.v.). 


atta-vadupadana: ‘attachment to the ego-belief', is one of the four kinds of 
clinging (upddana, q.v.). 


attention: see manasikara, sati. 
attentiveness, attention, mindfulness: see sati, satipatthana. 
atthangika-magga: the “Eightfold Path’; see magga. 


attha-patisambhida: the ‘analytical knowledge of meaning’, is one of the four 
kinds of analytical knowledge (patisambhida, q.v.). 


atthi-paccaya: ‘presence’, is one of the twenty-four conditions (paccaya, q.v.). 
auditory organ: see dyatana. 


avacara: ‘sphere’, realm. The three spheres of existence are the sensuous sphere 
(kamávacara), the fine material sphere (ripdvacara), and the immaterial sphere 
(arüpavacara). 

“Which things are of the sensuous sphere (kamdvacara)? Whatever things 
exist within the interval bounded beneath by the Avici-hell and above by the 
Paranimmitavasavatti-heaven (see deva), having therein their sphere, and 
being therein included, to wit: the groups of existence, the elements, bases 
(see khandha, dhàtu, àyatana), corporeality, feeling, perception, mental 
formations and consciousness, all these things are of the sensuous sphere. 





AVIHIMSA | 2I: 


“But which things are of the fine material sphere (ripavacara)? Whatever 
things exist within the interval bounded beneath by the Brahma-world and 
above by the Akanittha-world (see deva), having therein their sphere, and 
being therein included... and also consciousness and mental factors in one 
who has entered the (fine-material) absorptions, or who has been reborn in 
that sphere, or who already during his lifetime is living in happiness (of the 
absorptions), all these things are of the fine-material sphere. 


“Which things are of the immaterial sphere (ariipdvacara)? Consciousness and 
mental factors arising within the interval bounded beneath by the beings 
reborn in the sphere of unbounded space and above by the beings reborn 
in the sphere of neither-perception-nor-non-perception (see jhdna 5-8), and 
consciousness and mental factors in one who has entered the (immaterial 
absorptions), or who has been reborn in that sphere, or who already during his 
lifetime is living in happiness (of the immaterial absorptions), all these things 
are of the immaterial sphere." (See Dhs § 1280, 1282, 1284; Vibh XVIII). 


Source note: Kamdvacara is already met with in the oldest Sutta texts 
(e.g. DN 1). Rüpávacara and ariipdvacara, however, occur probably for 
the first time in Patis (I. 83ff.), while in the Abhidhamma Canon and 
the Commentaries all the three terms are frequently mentioned and 
explained. 


avajjana: 'advertence' of the mind towards the object, forms the first stage 
in the process of consciousness (see vififidna-kicca). If an object of the five 
physical senses is concerned, it is called ‘five-door advertence’ (pajica- 
dvardavajjana); in the case of a mental object, ‘mind-door advertence’ (mano- 
dvardavajjana). 


Source note: As the avajjana-citta in the process of cognition (citta- 
vithi) it is only found in the Commentaries; see citta-vithi. However, 
in the Patisambhidamagga (I 79) avajjana is found as the first stage 
of a rudimentary fourfold process of consciousness (vififiána-cariya). 
It is also found in the Patthana of the Abhidhamma Canon as the 
proximity condition for the five kinds of consciousness (Gvajjana 


aversion (from existence), contemplation of: see vipassana (VI. 5) 
avici: the name of one of the most frightful hells (niraya, q.v.). 


avigata-paccaya: ‘non-disappearance’, is one of the twenty-four conditions 
(paccaya, q.v.). 


Aviha: (derivation uncertain; Skr avrha) is one of the five Pure Abodes 
(suddhdavasa, q.v.) in the fine-material sphere. For details, see under andgami. 


avihimsa (equivalents: ahimsd, avihesd): ‘harmlessness’, non-violence, 
absence of cruelty. The ‘thought ofharmlessness (or: 'non-cruelty' ; avihimsá- 
vitakka) is one of the three constituents of right thought (sammd-sankappa), 
i.e., the second factor of the Eightfold Path (see magga). In the several lists of 





28 | AVIJÀ 


‘elements’ (dhatu) appears also an ‘element of harmlessness' (avihesd-dhdatu), 
in the sense of an elementary quality of noble thought. See Dhp 225, 261, 
2770, 300. 


avijja: ‘ignorance,’ nescience, unknowing; synonymous with delusion 
(moha; see mila), is the primary root of all evil and suffering in the world, 
veiling man’s mental eyes and preventing him from seeing the true nature 
of things. It is the delusion tricking beings by making life appear to them 
as permanent, happy, substantial and beautiful, and preventing them from 
seeing that everything in reality is impermanent, liable to suffering, void of 
‘T and ‘mine’ and basically impure (see vipallasa). Ignoranceis defined as ‘not 
knowing the Four Truths, namely, suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the 
way to its cessation’ (SN 11:4). 


As ignorance is the foundation of all life-affirming actions, of all evil and 
suffering, therefore it stands first in the formula of dependent origination 
(paticca-samuppdda,q.v.). Butforthatreason, says Vism(X VIL, 36ff.)ignorance 
should not be regarded as “the causeless root-cause of the world... It is not 
causeless. For a cause of it is stated thus ‘With the arising of cankers (Gsava, 
q.v.) there is the arising of ignorance’ (MN 9). But there is a figurative way in 
which it can be treated as a root-cause; namely, when it is made to serve as 
a starting point in an exposition of the Round of Existence... As it is said: 
“No first beginning of ignorance can be perceived, Bhikkhus, before which 
ignorance was not, and after which it came to be. But it can be perceived 
thatignorance has its specific condition (idappaccaya)" (AN 10:61). The same 
statement is made (AN 10:62) about the craving for existence (bhava-tanha; 
see tanhá). The latter and ignorance are called “the outstanding causes of 
kamma that lead to unhappy and happy destinies” (Vism XVII, 38). 


As ignorance still exists—though in a very refined way until the attainment 
of arahatship or holiness — it is counted as the last of the ten fetters 
(samyojana, q.v.) which bind beings to the cycle of rebirths. As the first two 
roots of evil, greed and hate (see mila), are on their part rooted in ignorance, 
consequently all unwholesome states of mind are inseparably bound up 
with it. Ignorance (or delusion) is the most obstinate of the three roots of evil. 


Ignorance is one of the cankers (asava, q.v.) and proclivities (anusaya, q.v.). It 
is often called a hindrance (nivarana; e.g. in SN 15:3; AN 10:61) but does not 
appear together with the usual list of five hindrances. 


avikkhepa: ‘undistractedness’, is a synonym of concentration (samādhi, q.v.), 
one-pointedness of mind (citf'ekaggata), and tranquillity (samatha, q.v.; 
further see samatha-vipassanà). 


avoidanceand performance: see cdritta, etc. The effort to avoid; see padhdana. 


avyakata: lit. ‘indeterminate’ — i.e., neither determined as karmically 
‘wholesome’ nor as ‘unwholesome’ — are the karmically neutral, i.e., 
amoral, states of consciousness and mental factors. They are either mere 
karma results (vipdka, q.v.), as e.g. all the sense perceptions and the 
mental factors associated therewith, or they are karmically independent 


AYATANA | 29 





functions (kiriya-citta, q.v.), i.e., neither karmic nor karma resultant. See 
Table I. 


Source note: This term in the sense of ‘amoral’ or ‘karmically neutral’, 
does not occur in the old Sutta texts, while it is found in Patis (e.g. I, 
79ff.). It plays an important role in the Abhidhamma Canon (e.g. Dhs) 
and the philosophical commentaries. 


avyapada: ‘hatelessness’, non-ill will, goodness; is one of the three kinds of 
right thought (see sacca, IV. 2), or wholesome thoughts (vitakka, q.v.), and 
is the ninth of the ten wholesome courses of actions (kamma-patha (2), q.v.). 
The most frequently used synonyms are adosa (see müla) and mettd (see 
brahma-vihara). 


awakening: see bodhi. 


ayatana: (1) ‘spheres’, is a term for the four immaterial absorptions; 
see jhana (5-8). 

(2) The twelve ‘bases’ or ‘sources’, on which depend the mental processes, 
consist of five physical sense organs and consciousness, being the six 
personal (ajjhattika) bases; and the six objects, the so-called external 
(bahira) bases, namely: 


eye, or visual organ visible object 

ear, or auditory organ sound, or audible object 

nose, or olfactory organ odour or olfactory object 

tongue, or gustatory organ taste or gustatory object 

body, or tactile organ body-impression, or tactile object 
mind-base, or consciousness 


B mind-object (dhammayatana) 
(manayatana) 


“By the visual organ (cakkhayatana) is meant the sensitive part of the eye 
(cakkhu-pasada) built up of the four elements... responding to sense-stimuli" 
(sappatigha). . .(VibhID).Similaristheexplanationofthefourremainingphysical 
sense organs. 


Mind-base (manayatana q.v.) is a collective term for all consciousness whatever, 
and should therefore not be confounded with the mind-element (mano-dhdatu; 
seedhatull, 16), whichlatterperforms only the functions of adverting (avajjana) 
to the sense-object, and of receiving (sampaticchana) the sense-object. On the 
functions of the mind, see vififiana-kicca. 


The visible object (riipdyatana) is described in Vibh II as “that phenomenon 
which is built up ofthe four physical elements and appears as colour, etc." What 
is seen by visual perception, i.e., by eye-consciousness (cakkhu-vififiana) are 
colours and differences of light, but not three-dimensional bodily things. 
*Mind-object-base' (dhammayatana) is identical with ‘mind-object-element’ 
(dhamma-dhàtu; see dhatu ll) and dhammdarammana (see árammana). It may be 
physical or mental, past, present or future, real or imaginary. 


The five physical sense organs are also called faculties (indriya, q.v.), and of 





30 | AYUHANA 


these faculties it is said in MN 43: “Each of the five faculties owns a different 
sphere, and none of them partakes of the sphere of another one;... they 
have mind as their support... are conditioned by vitality,... but vitality again 
is conditioned by heat, heat again by vitality, just as the light and flame of a 
burning lamp are mutually conditioned.” 


The twelve bases are fully discussed in Vism XV. In Yam III (see Guide, Ch. VI§ 
HI) the twelve terms are subjected to a logical investigation. The six personal 
bases form the fifth link of dependent origination (paticca-samuppdda 5, q.v.). 


ayühana: (karmic) ‘accumulation’, is a name used in the commentarial 
literature for the wholesome and unwholesome volitional activities (karma, 
q.v.) or karma-formations (sankhdra; see paticca-samuppáda), being the 
bases of future rebirth. ““Accumulation’, is a term for the karma-formations, 
and signifies those volitions (cetand) which arise at the performance of a 
karma, first while thinking ‘I will give alms’, and then while actually giving 
alms (e.g.) for one month or a year. The volition, however, at the time when 
one is handing the alms over to the recipient is called karma-process (kamma- 
bhava; see Vism XVII, IX, X). 


Or, the volitions during the first six impulsive-moments (javana, q.v.) 
depending on one and the same state of advertence (avajjana; see vififiana- 
kicca), these are called the karma-formations, while the seventh impulsive 
moment is called the karma-process (kamma-bhava)... 


Or, each volition is called ‘karma-process’ and the accumulation connected 
with it, ‘karma-formation’.” (Vism XVII) See paticca-samuppdda (2, 10). 


Source note: Met with for the first time in Patis (I, 10ff.). 





BAHULA-KAMMA | 31 


B 


bahula-kamma: ‘habitual karma’; see karma. 


bala: ‘powers’. Among various groups of powers the following five are most 
frequently met with in the texts: (1) faith (saddhà, q.v.), (2) energy (viriya, 
q.v.), (3) mindfulness (sati, q.v.), (4) concentration (samadhi, q.v.), (5) wisdom 
(pafifía, q.v.). 

Their particular aspect, distinguishing them from the corresponding 
five spiritual faculties (indriya, q.v.), is that they are unshakeable by their 
opposites: (1) the power of faith is unshakeable by faithlessness (unbelief); 
(2) energy, by laziness; (3) mindfulness, by forgetfulness; (4) concentration, 
by distractedness; (5) wisdom, by ignorance (see Patis: Nanakathà). They 
represent, therefore, the aspect of firmness in the spiritual faculties. 


According to AN 5:15, the power (1) becomes manifest in the four qualities of 
the stream-winner (sotapannassa angani, q.v.), (2) inthe four right efforts (see 
padhana), (3)inthe four foundations of mindfulness (satipatthàna, q.v.), (4) in 
the four absorptions (jhana, q.v.), (5) in the (full comprehension of the) Four 
Noble Truths (sacca, q.v.). See SN 48:43; SN 50 (Bala Samyutta). 


In AN 7:3, the powers of moral shame (hiri, q.v.) and moral dread (ottappa) 
are added to the aforementioned five. Several other groups of two (see 
patisankhana-bala), four, five and more powers are mentioned in the texts. 
About the ten powers of a Buddha, see dasa-bala. 


balance of mental faculties: indriya samatta (q.v.). 
bases: the twelve of the perceptual process: dyatana (q.v.). 
beautiful: sobhana (q.v.). 


beauty, deliverance through the perception of: See vimokkha (II. 3). To hold 
for beautiful or pure (subha) what is impure (asubha), is one of the four 
perversions (see vipallàsa). 


behaviour, morality consisting in good: abhisamácárika-sila (q.v.). 


being, living: satta (q.v.); further see puggala. Belief in eternal personality: 
bhava-ditthi (see ditthi), sassata-ditthi (q.v.). 


beings, the nine worlds of: sattávàása (q.v.). 
belief, blind: see indriya-samatta. 


bhanganupassana-fiana: ‘knowledge consisting in contemplation of 
dissolution’ (of all forms of existence), is one kind of insight; see visuddhi (VI, 
2). 


bhava: ‘becoming’, ‘process of existence’, consists of three planes: sensuous 





32 | BHAVA 


existence (kama-bhava), fine-materialexistence (riipa-bhava),andimmaterial 
existence (arüpa-bhava). See loka. The whole process of existence may be 
divided into two aspects: 


(1)Karma-process (kamma-bhava),i.e.,thekarmically activeside ofexistence, 
being the cause of rebirth and consisting in wholesome and unwholesome 
volitional actions. See karma, paticca-samuppáda (IX). 


(2) Karma-produced rebirth, or regenerating process (bhava), i.e., the 
karmically passive side of existence consisting in the arising and developing 
of the karma-produced and therefore morally neutral mental and bodily 
phenomena of existence. See Table I. 


Source note: The twofold division, kamma and upapatti, is found for the 
first time in the Vibhanga of the Abhidhamma Canon, but it expresses 
throughout the genuine teaching of the Suttas. 


bhava: (feminine and masculine) ‘nature’, refers to the sexual characteristics 
of the body, and belongs to the group of corporeality (see khandha). It is 
a commentarial term for the faculties of femininity and masculinity (see 
indriya 7, 8). 


Source note: As an isolated word, signifying the physical nature 
or faculties of sex, probably occurs only in the Commentaries. The 
expression itthibhava and purisabhdva, with the meaning of ‘being 
a man’, or ‘being a woman’, or after ñatvā, etc., as for instance fassá 
itthibhavam ñatvā, ‘knowing her to be a woman’; such expressions are 
often found in the oldest Sutta texts. 


bhava-ditthi: ‘belief in being (eternal personality); see sassata-ditthi, ditthi. 


bhavana: ‘mental development’ (lit. ‘calling into existence, producing’) is 
what in English is generally but rather vaguely called ‘meditation’. One has 
to distinguish two kinds: development of tranquillity (samatha-bhàvana), i.e., 
concentration (samādhi), and development of insight (vipassaná-bhàvaná), 
i.e., wisdom (paññā). 

These two important terms, tranquillity and insight (see samatha-vipassana), 
are very often met with and explained in the Suttas, as well as in the 
Abhidhamma. 


Tranquillity (samatha) is the concentrated, unshaken, peaceful, and therefore 
undefiled state of mind, while insight (vipassana) is the intuitive insight into 
the impermanence, misery and impersonality (anicca, dukkha, anattà; see ti- 
lakkhana) of all bodily and mental phenomena of existence included in the 
five groups of existence, namely, corporeality, feeling, perception, mental 
formations and consciousness; see khandha. 


Tranquillity, or concentration of mind, according to Sankhepavannanàá 
(Commentary to Abhidhammattha-sangaha), bestows a threefold blessing: 
favourable rebirth, present happy life, and purity of mind which is 
the condition of insight. Concentration (samadhi) is the indispensable 
foundation and precondition of insight by purifying the mind from the five 





BHAVANGA-CITTA | 33 


mental defilements or hindrances (nivarana, q.v.), while insight (vipassana) 
produces the four supramundane stages of holiness and deliverance of 
mind. The Buddha therefore says: “May you develop mental concentration, 
O monks; for who is mentally concentrated sees things according to reality” 
(SN 12:5). And in the Milindapaífiha it is said: “Just as when a lighted lamp is 
brought into a dark chamber, the lamp-light will destroy the darkness and 
produce and spread the light, just so will insight, once arisen, destroy the 
darkness of ignorance and produce the light of knowledge.” 


Vism III-XI gives full directions how to attain full concentration and the 
absorptions (jhàna, q.v.) by means of the following forty meditation subjects 
(kammatthana): 


Ten kasina exercises (see kasina). These produce the four absorptions. 
Ten loathsome subjects (asubha, q.v.). These produce the first absorption. 


Ten recollections (anussati,q.v.): of the Buddha (buddhünussati),the Doctrine 
(dhammanussati), the Brotherhood of the Noble Ones (sarghünussati), 
morality, liberality, the heavenly beings, death (marandnussati, q.v.), the 
body (kayagatasati, q.v.), in-and-out breathing (anapanasati, q.v.) and peace 
(upasamanussati, q.v.). Among these, the recollection (or mindfulness) of 
in-and-out breathing may produce all the four absorptions, that of the body 
the first absorption, the rest only neighbourhood-concentration (upacdra- 
samadhi; see samadhi). 


Four sublime abodes (brahma-vihàra, q.v.): loving kindness, compassion, 
altruistic joy, equanimity (mettà, karund, mudità, upekkha). Of these, the 
first three exercises may produce three absorptions, the last one the fourth 
absorption only. 


Four immaterial spheres (ariipdyatana; see jhüna): of unbounded space, 
unbounded consciousness, nothingness, neither-perception-nor-non- 
perception. These are based upon the fourth absorption. 


One perception of the loathsomeness of food (ahare patikkila-sanna), which 
may produce neighbourhood concentration. 


One analysis of the four elements (catudhdtu-vavatthana; see dhātu- 
vavatthdna), which may produce neighbourhood-concentration. 


Mental development forms one of the three kinds of meritorious action 
(pufifia-kiriya-vatthu,q.v.). ‘Delightin meditation’ (bhavana-ramataà)is one of 
the noble usages (ariya-vamsa, q.v.). 


bhavana-bala: see patisankhana-bala. 

bhavanga-citta: see bhavariga-sota. 

bhavana-maya-paíífía: wisdom based on mental development’; see paññā. 
bhavanga-santana: ‘continuity of subconsciousness’; see santana. 


bhavanga-sota and bhavanga-citta: the first term may tentatively be rendered 
as the ‘undercurrent forming the condition of being, or existence’, and the 





34 | BHAVA-TANHA 


second as 'subconsciousness', though, as will be evident from the following, it 
differs in several respects from the usage of that term in Western psychology. 
Bhavanga (bhava-anga), which, in the canonical works, is mentioned twice or 
thrice in the Patthana, is explained in the Abhidhamma commentaries as 
the foundation or condition (karana) of existence (bhava), as the sine qua non 
of life, having the nature of a process, lit. a flux or stream (sota). Herein, since 
time immemorial, all impressions and experiences are, as it were, stored up, 
or better said, are functioning, but concealed as such to full consciousness, 
from where however they occasionally emerge as subconscious phenomena 
and approach the threshold of full consciousness, or crossing it become 
fully conscious. This so-called ‘subconscious life-stream’ or undercurrent of 
life is that by which might be explained the faculty of memory, paranormal 
psychic phenomena, mental and physical growth, karma and rebirth, etc. An 
alternative rendering is ‘life-continuum’. 


It should be noted that bhavanga-citta is a karma resultant state of 
consciousness (vipáka, q.v.), and that, in birth as a human or in higher forms 
of existence, it is always the result of good, or wholesome karma (kusala- 
kamma-vipáka), though in varying degrees of strength (see patisandhi, end 
of the article). The same holds true for rebirth-consciousness (patisandhi) 
and death consciousness (cuti), which are only particular manifestations of 
subconsciousness. In Vism XIV it is said: 


"As soon as rebirth-consciousness (in the embryo at the time of conception) 
has ceased, there arises a similar subconsciousness with exactly the same 
object, following immediately upon rebirth-consciousness and being the 
result of this or that karma (volitional action done in a former birth and 
remembered there at the moment before death). And again a further similar 
state of subconsciousness arises. Now, as long as no other consciousness 
arises to interrupt the continuity of the life-stream, so long the life-stream, 
like the flow of a river, rises in the same way again and again, even during 
dreamless sleep and at other times. In this way one has to understand the 
continuous arising of those states of consciousness in the life-stream." See 
vififíana-kicca. For more details, see Fund Ch. II. 


Source note: These two compound terms belong exclusively 
to the exegetical literature, while the term bhavanga is several 
times, briefly and unexplained, mentioned in the Patthana of the 
Abhidhamma Canon, as though already known at that time. 


bhava-tanha: ‘craving for (eternal) existence’; see tanhd. 
bhavasava: ‘canker of existence’; see dsava. 


bhayatupatthana-fiana: ‘knowledge consisting in the awareness of terror’ 
is one of those kinds of insight-knowledge that form the ‘purification by 
knowledge and vision of the path-progress’ (see visuddhi, V1). 


bhikkhu: a fully ordained disciple of the Buddha. *Mendicant monk” may be 
suggested as the closest equivalent for “bhikkhu’; literally it means “he who 





BODHI | 35 


begs” but bhikkhus do not beg. They silently stand at the door for alms. They 
live on what is spontaneously given by the supporters. He is not a priest as 
he is no mediator between God and man. He has no vows for life, but he 
is bound by his rules which he takes of his own accord. He leads a life of 
voluntary poverty and celibacy. If he is unable to live the holy life, he can 
discard the robe at any time. 


bhojane mattafifiuta: ‘knowing the measure in eating’ 


“Now, O monks, the monk wisely reflecting partakes of his alms-food, neither 
for pastime, nor for indulgence, nor to become beautiful or handsome, but 
only to maintain and support this body, to avoid harm and to assist the holy 
life, knowing: ‘In this way I shall dispel the former pain (of hunger, etc.) and 
no new pain shall I let arise, and long life, blamelessness and ease will be 
my share.’ This, O monks, is knowing the measure ineating.” (AN 3:16). “How 
O monks, would it be possible for Nanda to lead the absolutely pure life of 
holiness, if he did not watch over his senses and did not know the measure 
in eating?” (AN 7:9). 


biases: see Gsava. 
birth process: upapatti-bhava; see bhava; see patisandhi, jati. 


bodhi (from verbal root budhi, to awaken, to understand): awakenment, 
enlightenment, supreme knowledge. “[Through bodhi] one awakens from 
the slumber or stupor (inflicted upon the mind) by the defilements (Kilesa, 
q.v.) and comprehends the Four Noble Truths (sacca, q.v.)” (Com to MN 10). 


The enlightenment of a Buddha is called sammdsambodhi (q.v.) ‘perfect 
enlightenment’. The faith (saddhd, q.v.) of a lay follower of the Buddha is 
described as “he believes in the enlightenment of the Perfect One” (saddahati 
Tathágatassa bodhim: MN 53, AN 3:2). 


The components of the state of enlightenment, and contributory factors to its 
achievement, are mentioned in the texts: the seven factors of enlightenment 
(bojjhanga (q.v.) = bodhi-anga) and the thirty-seven ‘things pertaining to 
enlightenment’ (bodhipakkhiya-dhamma, q.v.). In one of the later books of the 
Sutta Pitaka, the Buddhavamsa, ten bodhipacana-dhammá are mentioned, 
i.e., qualities that lead to the ripening of perfect enlightenment; these are 
the ten perfections (param, q.v.). 


There is a threefold classification of enlightenment: 1. that of a noble disciple 
(savaka-bodhi, q.v.), i.e., of an arahat; 2. that of an independently enlightened 
one (pacceka-bodhi, q.v.); and 3. that of a perfect enlightened one (sammd- 
sambodhi). This threefold division, however, is of later origin, and in this form 
it neither occurs in the canonical texts nor in the older Sutta Commentaries. 
The closest approximation to it is found in a verse Sutta which is probably 
of a comparatively later period, the Treasure Store Sutta (Nidhikanda Sutta) 
of the Khuddakapatha, where the following three terms are mentioned 
in stanza 15: sávaka-párami, pacceka-bodhi, buddha-bhiimi (see KhpTr, pp. 
247ff.). 





36 | BODHIPAKKHIY A-DHAMMA 


The commentaries (e.g. to M, Buddhavamsa, Cariyapitaka) generally give a 
fourfold explanation of the word bodhi: 1. the tree of enlightenment; 2. the 
holy path (ariya-magga); 3. Nibbana; and 4. omniscience (of the Buddha: 
sabbaññutā-ñāna). As to 2, the commentaries quote Cula Niddesa where 
bodhi is defined as the knowledge relating to the four paths (of stream-entry, 
etc.; catiisu maggesu nana). 


Neither in the canonical texts nor in the old commentaries is it stated 
that a follower of the Buddha may choose between the three kinds of 
enlightenment and aspire either to become a buddha, a pacceka-buddha, 
or an arahat-disciple. This conception of a choice between three aspirations 
is, however, frequently found in present-day Theravada countries, e.g. in Sri 
Lanka. 


bodhipakkhiya-dhamma: the thirty-seven ‘things pertaining to 
enlightenment’, or ‘requisites of enlightenment’ comprise the entire 
doctrines of the Buddha. They are: 


the four foundations of mindfulness (see satipatthàna), 
the four right efforts (see padhana), 

the four roads to power (see iddhi-pada), 

the five spiritual faculties (see indriya; see bala), 

the five spiritual powers (see bala), 

the seven factors of enlightenment (see bojjhaviga), 

the Noble Eightfold Path (see magga). 


In MN 77 all the thirty-seven bodhipakkhiya-dhamma are enumerated and 
explained though not called by that name. A detailed explanation of them 
is givenin Vism XXII. In SN 47:51, 67 only the five spiritual faculties (indriya) 
are called bodhipakkhiya-dhamma; and in the Jhana Vibhanga, only the seven 
factors of enlightenment (bojjhanga). 


See The Requisites of Enlightenment, by Ledi Sayadaw (Wheel 169/172). 


Bodhisatta: ‘Enlightenment Being’, is a being destined to Buddhahood, 
a future Buddha. According to the traditional belief a Bodhisatta, before 
reaching his last birth as a Buddha on this earth, is living in the Tusita heaven 
(see deva), the heaven of bliss. See AN 4:127; 8:70. 


In the Pali Canon and commentaries, the designation *Bodhisatta' is given 
only to Prince Siddhattha before his enlightenment and to his former 
existences. The Buddha himself uses this term when speaking of his life prior 
to enlightenment (e.g. MN 4, MN 26). Bodhisattahood is neither mentioned 
nor recommended as an ideal higher than or alternative to arahatship; 
nor is there any record in the Pali scriptures of a disciple declaring it as his 
aspiration; see bodhi. 


bodily action (wholesome or unwholesome): see karma, karma formations. 
Right bodily action: sammd-kammanta; see magga. 


bodily postures, the four: iriyd-patha (q.v.) 





BOJJHANGA | 37 


body: kaya (q.v.) Contemplation on the body is one of the four satipatthana 
(q.v.). 


body-witness: kdya-sakkhi (q.v.). 


bojjhanga: 'the seven factors of enlightenment', consist of: mindfulness 
(satisam bojjhanga; see sati); investigation of the law (dhamma-vicaya-sam 
bojjharga);energy (viriyasambojjhanga;seeviriya,padhana);rapture(pitisam 
bojjhanga, q.v.); tranquillity (passaddhisam bojjhanga, q.v.); concentration 
(samadhisam bojjhanga, q.v.); and equanimity (upekkhd, q.v.). “Because they 
lead to enlightenment, therefore they are called factors of enlightenment" 
(SN 46:5). 

Though in the second factor, dhamma-vicaya, the word dhamma is taken by 
most translators to stand for the Buddhist doctrine, it probably refers to the 
bodily and mental phenomena (nama-rüpa-dhamma) as presented to the 
investigating mind by mindfulness, the first factor. With that interpretation, 
the term may be rendered by ‘investigation of phenomena’. 


In AN 10:102, the seven factors are said to be the means of attaining the 
threefold wisdom (see te-vijja). 


They may be attained by means of the four foundations of mindfulness 
(satipatthana, q.v.), as it is said in SN 46:1 and explained in MN 118: 


(1) “Whenever, O monks, the monk dwells contemplating the body (kaya), 
feeling (vedaná), mind (citta) and mind-objects (dhamma), strenuous, clearly 
conscious, mindful, after subduing worldly greed and grief, at such a time 
his mindfulness is present and undisturbed; and whenever his mindfulness 
is present and undisturbed, at such a time he has gained and is developing 
the factor of enlightenment ‘mindfulness’ (sati-sambojjhanga), and thus this 
factor of enlightenment reaches fullest perfection. 


(2) “Whenever, while dwelling with mindfulness, he wisely investigates, 
examines and thinks over the law... at such a time he has gained and is 
developing the factor of enlightenment ‘investigation of the law’ (dhamma- 
vicaya bojjhanga)... 

(3) "Whenever, while wisely investigating his energy is firm and unshaken... 
at such a time he has gained and is developing the factor of enlightenment 
‘energy’ (viriya bojjhanga)... 

(4) “Whenever in him, while firm in energy, arises supersensuous rapture... 
at such a time he has gained and is developing the factor of enlightenment 
‘rapture’ (piti bojjhanga)... 

(5) "Whenever, while enraptured in mind, his body and his mind become 
composed... at such a time he has gained and is developing the factor of 
enlightenment 'tranquillity' (passaddhi bojjhanga). 

(6) "Whenever, while being composed in his body and happy, his mind 
becomes concentrated... at such a time he has gained and is developing the 
factor of enlightenment ‘concentration’ (samādhi bojjhanga) 





38 | BONDAGES 


(7) “Whenever he looks with complete indifference on his mind thus 
concentrated... at such a time he has gained and is developing the factor of 
enlightenment ‘equanimity’ (upekkha). 
Literature: Bojjhanga Samyutta (SN 46); Bojjhanga Vibhanga. For 
the conditions leading to the arising of each of the factors, see the 
Commentary to Satipatthana Sutta (Way of Mindfulness, by Soma Thera; 
3rd ed., 1967, BPS). Further, The Seven Factors of Enlightenment, by 
Piyadassi Thera (Wheel 1.) 


bondages, mental: cetaso vinibandha (q.v.). 

bonds, the four: yoga (q.v.). 

both-ways liberated: see ubhato-bhaga-vimutta, ariya-puggala B. 4. 
boundless consciousness (and boundless space), sphere of: see jhàna 5, 6. 


brahma-cariya: ‘pure (chaste) or holy life’, is a term for the life of the monk, 
and also the life of a lay-devotee who observes the eight moral precepts 
(sikkhd-pada, q.v.), who takes as the third precept the vow of chastity, i.e., full 
abstention from sexual relations. The highest aim and purpose of brahma- 
cariya is, according to MN 29, the ‘unshakeable deliverance of mind’ (akuppa 
ceto-vimutti). 


Brahma-kayika-deva: the ‘heavenly beings of the Brahma-world’ inhabit the 
first three heavens of the fine-material world (ripa-loka), corresponding to 
the first absorption (jhana, q.v.). The highest ruler of them is called the Great 
Brahma (Maha-Brahma). With caustic humour he is said (DN 11) to pretend: 
“I am Brahma, the Great Brahma, the Most High, the Invincible One, the 
Omniscient One, the Ruler, the Lord, the Creator, the Maker, the Perfect One, 
the Preserver, the Controller, the Father of all that was and will be." See deva 
(II, 1-3). 


brahma-loka: ‘Brahma-world’, in the widest sense, is a term for the fine- 
material (rüpa-loka) and immaterial world (arüpa-loka); in a narrower 
sense, however, only for the first three heavens of the fine-material world. 
See Brahma-kayika-deva. 


brahma-vihara: the four ‘sublime’ or divine abodes’ — also called the four 
boundless states (appamaññā) — are loving kindness (metta), compassion 
(karuna), altruistic (or sympathetic) joy (mudita), and equanimity (upekkha). 
The text on the development of these four sublime abodes (brahma-vihara- 
bhāvanā; see bhdvana), often met with in the Suttas, is as follows: 


"There, O monks, the monk with a mind full of loving kindness pervading 
first one direction, then a second one, then a third one, then the fourth 
one, just so above, below and all around, and everywhere identifying 
himself with all, he is pervading the whole world with mind full of loving 
kindness, with mind wide, developed, unbounded, free from hate and ill 
will." Hereafter follows the same theme with compassion, altruistic joy, and 
equanimity. 





BUDDHA-SASANA | 39 


Literature: Detailed explanation in Vism IX. For texts see PD § 97ff.; texts 
on mettü in The Practice of Loving Kindness, by Nanamoli Thera (Wheel 
7). The Four Sublime States, by Nyanaponika Thera (Wheel 6). Brahma 
Vihara, by Narada Thera (Vajirarama, Colombo, 1962). 


breathing: mindfulness of in-and-out-breathing; anapana-sati (q.v.). 
Buddha: see sammd-sambodhi. 
buddhanussati: ‘recollection of the Enlightened One’; see anussati. 


Buddha-sasana: see sdsana. 





40 | CAGA 


C 


caga: ‘liberality’, is one of the ‘blessings’ (see sampada), ‘foundations’ (see 
adhitthàna), ‘recollections’ (see anussati), ‘treasures’ (see dhana). 


cakka: ‘wheel’, is one of the seven ‘precious possessions’ (ratana) of a 
righteous World Emperor (cakkavatti-rdja: “king who owns the wheel,’ see 
DN 26), and symbolises conquering progress and expanding sovereignty. 
From that derives the figurative expression dhamma-cakkam pavatteti, 
‘he sets rolling the Wheel of the Law’ and the name of the Buddha’s first 
sermon, Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta (see dhamma-cakka). Another 
figurative meaning of cakka is ‘blessing’. There are four such ‘auspicious 
wheels’ or ‘blessings’: living in a suitable locality, company of good people, 
meritorious acts done in the past, right inclinations (AN 4:31). Bhava- 
cakka, ‘wheel of existence’, or of life, is a term for ‘dependent origination’ 
(see paticca-samuppáda). 

See The Buddhist Wheel Symbol, by T. B. Karunaratne (Wheel 137/138); The 
Wheel of Birth and Death, by Bhikkhu Khantipalo (Wheel 147/148/149). 


299 


cakkh' ayatana: ‘the base “visual organ’” (see ayatana). 


cakkhu: ‘eye’ ,seeayatana. Thefollowing fivekinds of ‘eyes’ arementionedand 
explained in Nidd II (PTS, p. 235; the first three also in It 52): 1. the physical 
eye (mamsa cakkhu); 2. the divine eye (dibba-cakkhu (q.v.); see abhinna); 3. 
the eye of wisdom (pafifia-cakkhu); 4. the eye of a Buddha (Buddha-cakkhu); 
5. the eye of all-round knowledge (samanta-cakkhu; a frequent appellation 
of the Buddha). 


cakkhu-dhatu: ‘the element “visual organ" (see dhátu). 
cakkhu-vififiana: 'eye-consciousness' (see vififiana). 
cankers: see dsava. 

carana: see vijja-carana. 


carita: ‘nature’, ‘character’. In Vism III there are explained six types of men: 
the greedy-natured (rdga-carita), the hate-natured (dosa-carita), the stupid 
or dull-natured (moha-carita), the faithful-natured (saddhd-carita), the 
intelligent-natured (buddhi-carita), and the ruminating-natured (vitakka- 
carita). 


Source note: Carita, rága-carita, dosa-carita, etc., are are first found in 
the Niddesa. 


caritta-silaandvaritta-sila: ‘morality consistinginperformanceandmorality 
consisting in avoidance,’ means “the performance of those moral rules which 
the Blessed one has ordained to be followed, and the avoidance of those 
things that the Blessed One has rejected as not to be followed” (Vism III). 





CETASIKA | 41 


Source note: These terms are only found in the Commentaries, such as 
Vism I, etc., but the teaching indicated by it is frequently mentioned in 
the old Sutta texts as karaniya and akaraniya (e.g. AN 2:16). 


catu-dhatu-vavatthana: ‘analysis of the four elements’; see dhatu- 
vavatthana. 


Catu-maharajika-deva: a class of heavenly beings of the sensuous sphere; 
see deva. 


catu-parisuddhi-sila: see sila. 


catu-vokara-bhava: ‘four-group existence’, is the existence in the immaterial 
world (arüpa-loka; see loka), since only the four mental groups (feeling, 
perception, mental formations, consciousness; see khandha) are found there, 
the corporeality group being absent. See paficavokara-bhava, eka-vokàra- 
bhava, vokara. 


cause: See paccaya (1). For the five causes of existence, see paticca- 
samuppada (10). 


cemetery, ascetic practice of living in: see dhutarga. 
cemetery-meditations: see sivathika. 


cetana: ‘volition’, ‘will’, is one of the seven mental factors (cetasika, q.v.) 
inseparably bound up with all consciousness, namely sensorial or mental 
impression (phassa), feeling (vedand), perception (safifía), volition (cetana), 
concentration (samādhi), vitality (jivita), advertence (manasiküra). See 
Tables II, III. 


With regard to karmic volition (i.e., wholesome or unwholesome karma) it 
is saidin AN 6:13: “Volition is action (karma), thus I say, O monks; for as soon 
as volition arises, one does the action, be it by body, speech or mind." For 
details, see paticca-samuppdda (10), karma. 


cetasika: ‘mental things, mental factors’, are those mental concomitants which 
are bound up with the simultaneously arising consciousness (citta = vififiana) 
and conditioned by its presence. Whereas in the Suttas all phenomena of 
existence are summed up under the aspect of five groups— corporeality, 
feeling, perception, mental formations, consciousness (see khandha)—the 
Abhidhamma as a rule treats them under the more philosophical three 
aspects: consciousness, mental factors and corporeality (citta, cetasika, riipa). 
Thus, of these three aspects, the mental factors (cetasika) comprise feeling, 
perception and the fifty mental formations, altogether fifty-two mental 
concomitants. Of these, twenty-five are lofty qualities (either karmically 
wholesome or neutral), fourteen karmically unwholesome, while thirteen are 
as such karmically neutral, their karmic quality depending on whether they 
are associated with wholesome, unwholesome or neutral consciousness. For 
details see Tables II, III. See cetand. 


Source note: The term cetasika occurs often in the old Sutta texts, 





42 | CETASO VINIBANDHA 


but only as adjective (e.g. cetasikam sukham, etc.) or, at times, used as 
a singular neuter noun (e.g. DN 1; p. 213, PTS). As a designation for 
mental factors, or concomitants of consciousness (citta-sampayutta 
dhamma), it is frequently met with in Dhs (§ 1189, 1512) as cetasika- 
dhamma, while in Vism, Abhidh-s, etc., cetasika is used also as a neuter 
noun, in the sense of mental phenomenon. 


cetaso vinibandha: ‘mental bondages’, are five things which hinder the mind 
from making right exertion, namely, lust for sensuous objects, for the body, 
for visible things, for eating and sleeping, and leading the monk’s life for the 
sake of heavenly rebirth. For details, see AN 5:205; 10:14; DN 33; MN 16. See 
cetokhila. 


cetokhila: ‘mental obduracies’, are five things which stiffen and hinder the 
mind from making right exertion, namely, doubt about the Master, about 
the Doctrine, about the (holy) Brotherhood, about the training, and anger 
against one’s fellow-monks. For details see AN 5:206, 10:14; DN 33; MN 16. 
See cetaso vinibandha. 


ceto-pariya-fiana: ‘penetrating knowledge of the mind (of others)’, is one of 
the six higher powers (see abhiññā 3). 


ceto-vimutti: deliverance of mind'. In the highest sense it signifies the 
fruition of arahatship (see ariya-puggala), and in particular, the concentration 
associated with it. It is often linked with the ‘deliverance through wisdom’ 
(pafifiá-vimutti, q.v.), e.g., in the ten powers of a Perfect One (see dasa- 
bala). See vimokkha I. 


It is also called ‘unshakeable deliverance of mind’ (akuppa-ceto-vimutti); 
further “boundlessdeliveranceofmind’ (appamdna-ceto-vimutti); deliverance 
of mind from the conditions of existence, or signless deliverance of 
mind’ (animittd-ceto-vimutti); ‘deliverance of mind from the appendages’ 
(akificafifia-ceto-vimutti), since that state of mind is free from the three bonds, 
conditions and appendants, i.e., from greed, hatred and ignorance; and since 
it is void thereof, it is called the ‘void deliverance of mind’ (sufifiatd-ceto- 
vimutti). 


Ina more restricted sense, ‘boundless deliverance of mind’ is a term for the 
four boundless states, i.e., loving kindness, compassion, altruistic joy, and 
equanimity (see brahma-vihdra); ‘deliverance of mind from the appendages’ 
stands for the ‘sphere of nothingness’ (akificafifiayatana see jhana 7); 
‘deliverance of mind from the conditions of existence’, for deliverance of 
mind due to non-attention to all conditions of existence; ‘void deliverance 
of mind’ for deliverance of mind due to contemplating voidness of self. For 
further details, see MN 43. 

chal-abhififia: the six ‘higher powers’; see abhififia. 

chal-abhiififio: an arahat who is a ‘possessor of the six higher powers’ (see 
abhinna). 


chanda: intention, desire, will. 





CITTAKKHANA | 43 


(1) As an ethically neutral psychological term, in the sense of ‘intention’, it 
is one of those general mental factors (cetasika, q.v. Table II) taught in the 
Abhidhamma, the moral quality of which is determined by the character of 
the volition (cetand, q.v.) associated therewith. The Commentaries explain 
it as ‘a wish to do’ (kattu-kamyata-chanda). If intensified, it acts also as a 
*predominance condition' (see paccaya 3). 


(2) As an evil quality it has the meaning of ‘desire’, and is frequently coupled 
with terms for ‘sensuality’, ‘greed’, etc., for instance: kamacchanda, ‘sensuous 
desire’, one of the five hindrances (see nivarana); chandaraga, ‘lustful desire’ 
(see kama). It is one of the four wrong paths (see agati). 


(3) As a good quality it is a righteous will or zeal (dhamma-chanda) and 
occurs, e.g., in the formula of the four right efforts (see padhdna): “The monk 
rouses his will (chandam janeti)...” If intensified, it is one of the four roads to 
power (see iddhipáda). 


change, contemplation of: one of the eighteen chief kinds of insight 
(vipassaná, q.v.). 


chaos: See kappa. 

character: on the six kinds of human character, see carita. 
characteristics of existence, the three: ti-lakkhana (q.v.). 
chaste life: brahma-cariya (q.v.). 


chief elements, the four: mahd-bhiita (q.v.); dhàtu (q.v.). 


ax. 


cintamaya-pafifia: ‘wisdom (or knowledge) based on thinking’; see panda. 


e 


citta: ‘mind’, ‘consciousness’, ‘state of consciousness’, is a synonym of mano 
(q.v.) and vififiana (see khandha and Table I). Dhs divides all phenomena into 
consciousness (citta), mental concomitants (cetasika, q.v.) and corporeality 
(rüpa). 

In adhicitta, *higher mentality', it signifies the concentrated, quietened 
mind, and is one of the three trainings (see sikkha). The concentration (or 
intensification) of consciousness is one of the four roads to power (see 
iddhipada). 


citta-ja (citta-samutthana)-ripa: 'mind-produced corporeality’; see 
samutthana. 


citta-kammaíifíata,citta-kammafifiatàlahutà,citta-kammafifiatàmudutà,citta- 
kammaññatā págufifiatà, citta-kammaiifiatà passaddhi, citta-kammafifiatà 
ujukata; see Table II. 


Source note: First found in the Dhammasangani (8 1) of the 
Abhidhamma Canon; see lahutà. 


cittakkhana: ‘consciousness-moment’, is the time occupied by one single 
stage in the perceptual process or cognitive series (citta-vithi; see vififiana- 





44 | CITTANUPASSANA 


kicca). This moment again is subdivided into the genetic (uppdda), static 
(thiti) and dissolving (bharga) moment. One such moment is said in the 
commentaries to be of inconceivably short duration and to last not longer 
than the billionth part of the time occupied by a flash of lightning. However 
that may be, we ourselves know from experience that it is possible within 
one single second to dream of innumerable things and events. In AN 1:10 itis 
said, “Nothing, O monks, do I know that changes so rapidly as consciousness. 
Scarcely anything may be found that could be compared with this so rapidly 
changing consciousness”; see khana. 


cittanupassana: ‘contemplation of consciousness’, is one of the four 
foundations of mindfulness (satipatthana, q.v.) 


citta-samutthana-rüpa: ‘mind-produced corporeality’; see samutthana. 
citta-sankhara: see sankhdara. 
citta-santana: ‘consciousness-continuity’; see santana. 


cittass'ekaggata: 'one-pointedness of mind’, is a synonym of concentration, 
or samādhi (q.v.) 


itta-vi asa: i ind’; vipallàsa. 
citta-vipallasa: ‘perversion of mind’; see ll 


citta-visuddhi: 'purification of mind', is the second of the seven stages of 
purification (visuddhi, IL. q.v.). 


citta-vithi: ‘process of consciousness’; see vififiana-kicca. 


Source note: This, as well as all terms for the various functions within 
the processes of consciousness, such as Gvajjana, sampaticchana, 
santirana, votthapana, javana, tadarammana, bhavanga, or cuti, are 
never found in the Sutta Canon, except Gvajjana and javana in the 
Patisambhidamagga; see Gvajjana and javana. In the Abhidhamma 
Canon, Gvajjana, bhavanga and cuti are found in the Patthana. 
The stages, however, must have been more or less known. See e.g. 
Patth: Cakkhu-vififianam tam sampayuttaka ca dhammā (= cetasikà), 
mano-dhatuya (performing the  sampaticchana-function), tam 
sampayuttakanan ca dhammanam (cetasikanam) anantara-paccayena 
paccayo. Mano-dhütu... manoviñňāņa-dhātuyā (performing the 
santirana and votthapana function)... Purima purima kusalà dhamma 
(javand) pacchimánam | pacchimaànam | kusalànam | dhammànam 
(javanacittanam) | anantara-paccayena  paccayo... avydkatanam 
dhammaànam (tadárammana- and bhavanga-cittanam...). 


citt'ekaggata: cittass'ekaggatà (q.v.). 
clarity of consciousness: sampajaiifia (q.v.). 
clinging, the four kinds of: updddna (q.v.). 


cognitive series: see vinidna-kicca. 





CORPOREALITY -PERCEPTIONS | 45 


companionship: influence of good and bad companionship; see samseva. 
compassion: karund; see brahma-vihara. 


comprehension, clear: see sampajaiifia. Comprehension, clear in insight; 
see sammasana. As an alternative translation for full understanding, 
see parififia. 

co-nascence: sahajáta-paccaya, is one of the twenty-four conditions 
(paccaya, q.v.). 

conceit: mdna (q.v.); further see samyojana. 


concentration: samādhi (q.v.). Right concentration; see sacca (IV. 8), magga 
(8). Wrong concentration; see micchd-magga (8). 


conception: 1. thought-conception: See vitakka-vicara. 2. (in the mother's 
womb): okkanti (q.v.). 


conditions, the twenty-four: paccaya (q.v.). 
conditions of existence, deliverance from the: see ceto-vimutti; vimokkha. 
confidence: see saddhà. 


consciousness: vififidna (see khandha), citta (q.v.), mano (q.v.). Moment 
of consciousness: citta-kkhana (q.v.). Contemplation of consciousness: 
cittànupassaná; see satipatthüna. Corporeality produced by consciousness: 
citta-ja-rüpa; see samutthüna. Abodes or supports of consciousness: 
vinndnatthiti (q.v.). Functions of consciousness: vififiana-kicca (q.v.). 


contemplation: see anupassand. 
contentedness (with whatever robe, etc.): see ariya-vamsa. 


contentment: appicchatà (q.v.) is one of the ascetic virtues. See AN 
10:181—90. 


contiguity: samanantara-paccaya, is one of the twenty-four conditions 
(paccaya, q.v.). 


continuity (of body, subconsciousness, consciousness or groups of 
existence): santana (q.v.). 


control, effort of: see padhüna. 
conventional (expression or truth): see desand. 


corporeality: produced through consciousness, karma, etc.; see samutthana. 
Sensitive corporeality: pasdda-riipa (q.v.). 


corporeality and mind: see nàma-rüpa. 
corporeality-group: rüpakkhandha: see khandha. 


corporeality-perceptions: rüpa-safifia; see jhàna. 





46 | CORRUPTIONS 


corruptions: see upakkilesa. 

cosmogony: See kappa. 

counteractive karma: upapilaka-kamma; see karma. 
counter-image (during concentration): see nimitta, kasina, samadhi. 
course of action (wholesome or unwholesome): kamma-patha (q.v.). 
covetousness: abhijjhà (q.v.); further see kamma-patha (1). 
cowardice: see agati. 

craving: tanhd (q.v.), rága (q.v.); further see miila. 

created, the: sarikhata (q.v.). 


cuti-citta: ‘death-consciousness’, lit. ‘departing consciousness’, is one of the 
fourteen functions of consciousness (vififidna-kicca, q.v.). 


Source note: First found in the Patthana and Kathavatthu of the 
Abhidhamma Canon; see citta-vithi. 


cutüpapata-fiana: the ‘knowledge of the vanishing and reappearing’ (of 
beings) is identical with the divine eye; see abhififia. 


cycle of existence: see samsara, vatta. 


DÀNA | 47 





D 


dana: ‘almsgiving’, liberality, offering. “He who gives alms, bestows a fourfold 
blessing: he helps to long life, good appearance, happiness and strength. 
Therefore long life, good appearance, happiness and strength will be his 
share, whether amongst heavenly beings or amongst men” (AN 4:57). 


“Five blessings accrue to the giver of alms: the affection of many, noble 
association, good reputation, self-confidence, and heavenly rebirth’ (see AN 
5:34). Seven further blessings are given in AN 7:54. 


Liberality, especially the offering of robes, food, etc., to the monks, is highly 
praised in all Buddhist countries of Southern Asia as a fundamental virtue 
and as a means to suppress man’s inborn greed and egoism. But, as in any 
other good or bad action, so also in offering gifts, it is the noble intention 
and volition that really counts as the action, not the mere outward deed. 


Almsgiving or liberality (dana), constitutes the first kind of meritorious 
activity, the two others being morality (sila, q.v.) and mental development 
(bhavana); see pufifia-kiriya-vatthu. Liberality (caga) forms one of the ten 
recollections (anussati, q.v.) and almsgiving one of the ten perfections (see 
parami). 


dasa- (Tathagata-) bala: ‘the ten powers (of a Perfect One); or, “he who 
possesses the ten powers’, i.e., the Buddha. About him it is said (e.g., MN 12; 
AN 10:21): 


“There, O monks, the Perfect One understands according to reality the 
possible as possible, and the impossible as impossible... the result of 
past, present and future actions... the path leading to the welfare of all... 
the world with its many different elements... the different inclinations in 
beings... the lower and higher faculties in beings... the defilement, purity 
and rising with regard to the absorptions, deliverances, concentration and 
attainments... remembering many former rebirths... perceiving with the 
divine eye how beings vanish and reappear again according to their actions 
(karma)... gaining, through extinction of all taints, possession of ‘deliverance 
of mind’ and ‘deliverance through wisdom...” 


dasaka-kalapa: see rüpa-kalàpa. 
dasa-parami: see párami. 
dasa-puiifia-kiriya-vatthu: see pufifia-kiriya-vatthu. 


death: marana (q.v.). Contemplation of death: marandnussati (q.v.). As divine 
messenger: devadiita (q.v.). 


death-consciousness: cuti-citta, is one of the fourteen functions of 
consciousness (vififiana-kicca, q.v.). 





48 | DEATHLESSNESS 


deathlessness: amata (q.v.). 
death-proximate karma: marandsanna-kamma; see karma. 
deciding function (of consciousness): see vi/ifiána-kicca. 


decline (in morality, wisdom, etc.): see hdna-bhdgiya-sila. Liable to decline, 
parihana-dhamma (q.v.). 


defilements: see kilesa, upakkilesa. Ten defilements of insight: 
vipassanüpakkilesa; see visuddhi VI. Round of defilements; see vatta (1). 


deliverance: see vimutti, vimokkha. The eight kinds of deliverance (or 
liberation), see vimokkha. Deliverance of mind, deliverance through 
voidness, boundless deliverance, etc., see ceto-vimutti. Desire for deliverance, 
see visuddhi (VI, 6). Deliverance through wisdom; pafifiavimutti (q.v.). Three 
doors of deliverance (or gateways of liberation), see visuddhi (VI, 8). 


deluded consciousness: see Table I, 32, 33. 

deluded-natured: moha-carita; see carita. 

delusion: see moha, avijjà. 

demons’ realm: asura-nikdya; see apáya. 

departed, the spirits of the: peta (q.v.). 

dependent origination: paticca-samuppdda (q.v.). 

derived corporeality: upādā-rūpa (q.v.); further see khandha (1, B.). 


desana: ‘exposition’ of the doctrine, may be either an exposition true in the 
highest sense (paramattha-desana), or it may not be true in the highest, but 
only in the conventional sense (vohdra-desanda). See paramattha, vohàra. 


desire for deliverance: see visuddhi (VI, 6). 
desireless deliverance: see vimokkha (1). 
desirelessness, contemplation on: see vipassana (12). 


destiny, evil views with fixed destiny: niyata-miccha-ditthi (q.v.). Men with 
fixed destiny: niyata-puggala (q.v.). See gati. 


destruction: overcoming, or liberation from, evil things through their 
destruction; samuccheda-pahdana or samuccheda-vimutti; see pahàna. 


destructive karma: upaghdtaka-kamma; see karma. 
detachment: viveka (q.v.). 

determination: see adhimokkha, adhitthana. 
determining: votthapana (see viifiána-kicca). 


determining the reality: see vavatthàna. 





DEVA-DÜTA | 49 


deva (lit: the Radiant Ones; related to Lat. deus): heavenly beings, deities, 
celestials, are beings who live in happy worlds, and who, as a rule, are 
invisible to the human eye. They are subject, however, just like all human and 
other beings, to ever-repeated rebirth, old age and death, and thus are not 
freed from the cycle of existence and from misery. There are many classes of 
heavenly beings. 


(D 


The six classes of heavenly beings of the sensuous sphere (kamavacara or 
kama-loka; see avacara, loka) are Cátummaharàajika-deva, Tavatimsa, Yama, 
Tusita(see Bodhisatta), Nimmàna-rati, Paranimmita-vasavatti. See anussati 6. 


(D 
The heavenly beings of the fine-material sphere (ripávacara or riipa-loka) 
are: 


(1) Brahma-pàrisajja, Brahma-purohita, Mahabrahmano(seebrahma-kàyika- 
deva). Amongst these three classes will be reborn those with a weak, medium 
or full experience of the first absorption (jhdna, q.v.). 


(2) Parittabha, Appamanabha, Abhassara. Here will be reborn those with 
experience of the second absorption. 


(3) Paritta-subha, Appamdana-subha, Subha-kinna (or kinha). Here will be 
reborn those with experience of the third absorption. 


(4) Vehapphala, Asafifia-satta (q.v.), Suddhdavasa (q.v.; further see andgami). 
Amongst the first two classes will be reborn those with experience of the 
fourth absorption, but amongst the third class only anagamis (q.v.). 


(ID 

The four grades of heavenly beings of the immaterial sphere (ariipdvacara 
or ariipa-loka) are: the heavenly beings of the sphere of unbounded 
space  (akasaánaficayatanüpaga-devd), of unbounded consciousness 
(vififianaficayatanüpaga-deva), of nothingness (akificanndyataniipaga deva), 
of neither-perception-nor-non-perception (nevasafifianasafifiayatanupaga- 
deva). Here will be reborn those with experience of the four immaterial 
spheres (ariipdyatana; see jhàna 5-8). 


See Gods and the Universe by Francis Story (Wheel 180/181). 


deva-düta: ‘divine messengers’, is a symbolic name for old age, disease and 
death, since these three things remind man of his future and rouse him to 
earnest striving. In AN 3:35, it is said: 


“Did you, O man, never see in the world a man or a woman eighty, ninety 
or a hundred years old, frail, crooked as a gable-roof, bent down, resting 
on crutches, with tottering steps, infirm, youth long since fled, with broken 
teeth, grey and scanty hair, or bald-headed, wrinkled, with blotched limbs? 
And did it never occur to you that you also are subject to old age, that you 
also cannot escape it? 





50 | DEVATANUSSATI 


“Did you never see in the world a man or a woman, who being sick, afflicted 
and grievously ill, and wallowing in their own filth, was lifted up by some 
people, and put down by others? And did it never occur to you that you also 
are subject to disease, that you also cannot escape it? 


“Did you never see in the world the corpse of a man or a woman, one or 
two or three days after death, swollen up, blue-black in colour, and full of 
corruption? And did it never occur to you that you also are subject to death, 
that you also cannot escape it?” See MN 130. 


devatanussati: ‘recollection of the heavenly beings’; see anussati. 


development (mental): bhavand(q.v.).Efforttodevelop; seepadhana. Wisdom 
based on development, see paññā. Gradual development of the Eightfold 
Path; see progress of the disciple (q.v.). 


deviation (from morality and understanding): vipatti (q.v.). 
devotee: updsaka (q.v.). 


dhamma: lit. the ‘bearer’, constitution (or nature of a thing), norm, law (jus), 
doctrine; justice, righteousness; quality; thing, object of mind (see ayatana) 
‘phenomenon’. In all these meanings the word dhammais to be met with in the 
texts. The Commentary to DN instances four applications of this term: guna 
(quality, virtue), desand (instruction), pariyatti (text), nijjivatà (soullessness, 
e.g. “all dhamma, phenomena, are impersonal,” etc.). The Commentary to 
Dhs has hetu (condition) instead of desana. Thus, the analytical knowledge 
of the law (seepatisambhidà)isexplainedin Vism XIV andin Vibhas hetumhi- 
iiàna, knowledge of the conditions. 

The Dhamma, as the liberating law discovered and proclaimed by the 
Buddha, is summed up in the Four Noble Truths (see sacca). It forms one of 
the Three Gems (ti-ratana, q.v.) and one of the ten recollections (anussati, 
q.v.). 

Dhamma, as object of mind (dhammayatana, see dyatana) may be anything 
past, present or future, corporeal or mental, conditioned or not (see sañkhāra 
4), real or imaginary. 


dhamma-cakka: the ‘Wheel (realm) of the Law’, is a term for the doctrine 
'set rolling (established) by the Buddha, i.e., the Four Noble Truths (sacca, 
q.v.). 

“The Perfect One, O monks, the Holy One, Fully Enlightened One, in the Deer 
Park at Isipatana near Benares, has set rolling (established) the unsurpassed 
Wheel (realm) of the Law" (MN 141). See cakka. 


dhamma-desana: ‘exposition of the Doctrine (law)’; see desand. 
dhamma-dhatu: mind-object-element (see dhdatu). 


dhammanupassana: ‘contemplation of the mind objects’ is the last of the four 
foundations of mindfulness (satipatthana, q.v.) 





DHATU | 51 


dhammanusari: the ‘dhamma-devotee’, is one of the seven noble disciples 
(ariya-puggala, q.v.). 


dhammanussati: ‘recollection of the Law’, is one of the ten recollections 
(anussati, q.v.). 


dhamma-patisambhida: the ‘analytical knowledge of the law’, is one of the 
four kinds of analytical knowledge (patisambhida, q.v.). 


dhammatthiti-fiana: ‘knowledge of the fixity oflaw',isatermforthat ‘insight 
which is leading up’ to the entrance into one of the four supermundane paths 
(vutthüna-gámini-vipassand, q.v.). In the Sutta (SN 11:70) this (ascending) 
insight is called the ‘knowledge of the fixity of the law’: “At first, Susima, 
there exists the knowledge of the fixity of the law, and later the knowledge 
of Nibbana." (See Vism XXI.) 


dhamma-vicaya-sambojjhanga: 'investigation of the law as a factor of 
enlightenment’, is one of the seven factors of enlightenment (bojjhanga, q.v.). 


dhammayatana: ‘mind-object as base’ (ayatana, q.v.). 


dhana: ‘treasures’, a term for the following seven qualities: faith, morality, 
moral shame, moral dread, learning, liberality, and wisdom. See AN 7:5, 6. 
See Treasures of the Noble, by Soma Thera (Bodhi Leaves 27, BPS). 


dhatu: ‘elements’, are the ultimate constituents of a whole. 


(I) The four physical elements (dhdatu or mahda-bhiita), popularly called earth, 
water, fire and wind, are to be understood as the primary qualities of matter. 
They are named in Pali: pathavi-dhátu, Gpo-dhatu, tejo-dhátu, and vayo-dhatu 
In Vism XI, 2 the four elements are defined thus: “Whatever is characterised 
by hardness (thaddha-lakkhana) is the earth or solid-element; by cohesion 
(abandhana) or fluidity, the water-element; by heating (paripdcana), the fire 
or heat-element; by strengthening or supporting (vitthambhana), the wind 
or motion-element. All four are present in every material object, though in 
varying degrees of strength. If, for instance, the earth element predominates, 
the material object is called ‘solid’, etc. For the analysis of the four elements, 
see dhátu-vavatthàna. 


(II) The eighteen physical and mental elements that constitute the conditions 
or foundations of the process of perception, consist of the following: 


(1) visual organ (eye) (8) odour or olfactory object 
(2) auditory organ (ear) (9) gustatory object 

(3) olfactory organ (nose) (10) body-impression element 
(4) gustatory organ (tongue) (11) eye-consciousness 

(5) tactile organ (body) (12) ear-consciousness 

(6) visible object (13) nose-consciousness 


(7) sound or audible object (14) tongue-consciousness 





52 | DHATU-VAVATTHANA 


(15) body-consciousness (17) mind-object (dhamma-dhatu) 


(16) mind-element (mano-dhatu) (18) mind-consciousness 
(mano-vififiana-dhátu) 


1-10 are physical; 11-16 and 18 are mental; 17 may be either physical or 
mental. 16 performs the function of advertence (Gvajjana) towards the 
object at the inception of a process of sensuous consciousness; it further 
performs the function of receiving (sampaticchana) the sensuous object. 18 
performs the function of investigation (santirana), determining (votthapana) 
and registering (taddrammana). For its other functions, see Table I. For the 
fourteen functions of consciousness, see vi/ifiana-kicca. See MN 115; SN 14 
and especially Vibh II (Guide Ch. 2 § 2.), Vism XV, 17ff. 


Of the many further groupings of elements (enumerated in MN 115), 
the best known is that of the three world-elements: the sensuous world 
(kama-dháàtu), the fine-material world (rüpa-dhàtu), the immaterial world 
(arüpa-dhátu); further the sixfold group: the solid, liquid, heat, motion, space, 
and consciousness (pathavi, apo, tejo, vàyo, dkdsa, vififiana; see above I), 
described in MN 140; see also MN 112. 


dhatu-vavatthana: ‘analysis (or determining) of the four elements’, is 
described in Vism XI, 2, as the last of the forty mental exercises (see bhavaná). 
In a condensed form this exercise is handed down in DN 22 and MN 10 (see 
satipatthüna), but in detail explained in MN 28, 62, 140. The simile of the 
butcher in MN 10 (Just, O monks, as a skilled butcher or butcher's apprentice, 
after having slaughtered a cow and divided it into separate portions, 
should sit down at the junction of four highroads; just so does the disciple 
contemplate this body with regard to the elements") is thus explained in 
Vism XI: “To the butcher, who rears the cow, brings it to the slaughter-house, 
ties it, puts it there, slaughters it, or looks at the slaughtered and dead cow, 
the idea ‘cow’ does not disappear as long as he has not yet cut the body 
open and taken it to pieces. As soon, however, as he sits down, after having 
cut it open and taken it to pieces, the idea ‘cow’ disappears to him, and 
the idea ‘meat’ arises. And he does not think: ‘A cow do I sell’, or ‘A cow do 
they buy.’ Just so, when the monk formerly was still an ignorant worldling, 
layman or a homeless one, the ideas ‘living being’ or ‘man’ or ‘individual 
had not yet disappeared as long as he had not taken this body, whatever 
position or direction it had, to pieces and analysed it piece by piece. As soon, 
however, as he analysed this body into its elements, the idea ‘living being 
disappeared to him, and his mind became established in the contemplation 
of the elements." 


Source note: This term, and also its synonym dhátu-manasikára 
‘reflection on the elements’, is only found in the commentaries, while 
the subject in question is often treated in the old Sutta texts (e.g. MN 
28, 62, 140, etc.). See sammasana. 


dhutanga:lit.'meansofshakingoff(thedefilements)'; ‘means of purification’, 
ascetic or austere practices. These are strict observances recommended by 





DHUTANGA | 53 


the Buddha to monks as a help to cultivate contentedness, renunciation, 
energy and the like. One or more of them may be observed for a shorter or 
longer period of time. 


“The monk training himself in morality should take upon himself the means 
of purification, in order to gain those virtues through which the purity of 
morality will become accomplished, to wit: fewness of needs, contentedness, 
austerity, detachment, energy, moderation, etc.” (Vism II). 


Vism II describes thirteen dhutangas, consisting in the following vows: 
(1) to wear patched-up robes: pamsukilik’ anga, 
(2) to wear only three robes: tecivarik’ anga, 
(3) to go for alms: pindapdtik anga, 
(4) not to omit any house while going for alms: sapadanik’ anga, 
(5) to eat at one sitting: ekasanik' anga, 
(6) to eat only from the alms-bowl: pattapindik’ anga, 
(7) to refuse all further food: khalu-paccha-bhattik’ anga, 
(8) tolive in the forest: Grannik anga, 
(9) to live under a tree: rukkha-milik’ anga, 
(10) to live in the open air: abbhokasiK' arga, 
(11) to live in a cemetery: sosünik'anga, 
(12) to be satisfied with whatever dwelling: yathá-santhatik' anga, 
(13) to sleep in the sitting position (and never lying down): nesajjik'anga. 


These thirteen exercises are all, without exception, mentioned in the old 
Sutta texts (e.g. MN 5, 113; AN 5:181—90), but never together in one and the 
same place. 


“Without doubt, O monks, it is a great advantage to live in the forest as a 
hermit, to collect one's alms, to make one's robes from picked-up rags, to be 
satisfied with three robes" (AN 1:30). 


The vow of (1), for example, is taken in the words: “I reject robes offered to 
me by householders,” or “I take upon myself the vow of wearing only robes 
made from picked-up rags.” Some of the exercises may also be observed by 
the lay-adherent. 


Here it may be mentioned that each newly ordained monk, immediately 
after his being admitted to the Order, is advised to be satisfied with whatever 
robes, alms-food, dwelling and medicine he gets: “The life of the monks 
depends on the collected alms as food... on the root of a tree as dwelling... 
on robes made from patched-up rags... on stale cow's urine as medicine. 
May you train yourself therein all your life." 

Since the moral quality of any action depends entirely upon the accompanying 
intention and volition, this is also the case with these ascetic practices, as is 
expressly stated in the Visuddhimagga. Thus the mere external performance 
is not the real exercise, as it is said (Pug 275-84): “Some one might be 





54 | DIBBA-CAKKHU 


going for alms, etc., out of stupidity and foolishness—or with evil intention 
and filled with desires — or out of insanity and mental derangement — 
or because such practice had been praised by the Noble Ones...” These 
exercises are, however, properly observed “if they are taken up only for the 
sake of frugality, of contentedness, of purity, etc.” 


On dhutanga practice in modern Thailand, see With Robes and Bowl, by 
Bhikkhu Khantipalo (Wheel 82/83). 


Source note: This compound term is first used in the Niddesa, which 
lists only eight observances. The only place in the Suttas where the 
first part, dhuta, is used in the above sense, is found in SN 14. The 
names of the performers of these thirteen ascetic exercises, however, 
are all mentioned in the Suttas, but scattered here and there, for 
instance: pamsukülika, arafifiüka, pindapatika, ekasanika, tecivarika, 
sapadanacart, sosanika, abhhokasika, nesajjika, yathásanthatika, in 
MN 5, 113; AN 5:181—190, etc.; rukkhamülika, khalupacchabhattika 
and pattapindika in AN 5:189ff. etc. 


dibba-cakkhu: the divine eye’, is one of the six higher powers (abhififia, 
q.v.), and one of the three kinds of knowledge (te-vijjd, q.v.). 


dibba-loka: heavenly world; see deva. 
dibba-sota: the divine ear’, is one of the six higher powers (abhififia, q.v.). 
dibba-vihara: see vihara. 


disappearance: vigata-paccaya, is one of the twenty-four conditions 
(paccaya, q.v.). 


disciplinary code: see pátimokkha. 

discursive thinking: vicdra; see vitakka-vicara. 

disease: one of the ‘divine messengers’ (devadiita, q.v.). 

disinterestedness (regarding the whole world): see sabbaloke anabhirati- 
sanna. 

dispensation: see sdsana. 


dissociation: vippayutta-paccaya, is one of the twenty-four conditions 
(paccaya, q.v.). 


dissolution, contemplation of: khaydnupassand, is one of the eighteen chief 
kinds of insight (vipassand, q.v.). 


dittha-dhamma-vedaniya-kamma: karma bearing fruit in this present 
life; see karma. 


ditthi (lit. ‘sight’; Y dis, to see): view, belief, speculative opinion, insight. If 
not qualified by samma, ‘right’, it mostly refers to wrong and evil view or 
opinion, and only in a few instances to right view, understanding or insight 
(e.g. ditthi ppatta, q.v., ditthi-visuddhi, purification of insight; ditthi-sampanna, 
possessed of insight). 





DITTHI | 55 


Wrong or evil views (ditthi or miccha-ditthi) are declared as utterly rejectable 
for being a source of wrong and evil aspirations and conduct, and liable at 
times to lead man to the deepest abysses of depravity, as it is said in AN 1:22: 


“No other thing than evil views do I know, O monks, whereby to such an 
extent the unwholesome things not yet arisen arise, and the unwholesome 
things already arisen are brought to growth and fullness. No other thing 
than evil views do I know, whereby to such an extent the wholesome things 
not yet arisen are hindered in their arising, and the wholesome things 
already arisen disappear. No other thing than evil views do I know, whereby 
to such an extent human beings at the dissolution of the body, at death, 
are passing to a way of suffering, into a world of woe, into hell.” Further in 
AN 1:23: “Whatever a man filled with evil views performs or undertakes, or 
whatever he possesses of will, aspiration, longing and tendencies, all these 
things lead him to an undesirable, unpleasant and disagreeable state, to woe 
and suffering.” 


From the Abhidhamma (Dhs) it may be inferred that evil views, whenever 
they arise, are associated with greed (see Table I, 22, 23, 26, 27). 


Numerous speculative opinions and theories, which at all times have 
influenced and still are influencing mankind, are quoted in the Sutta-texts. 
Amongst them, however, the wrong view which everywhere, and at all 
times, has most misled and deluded mankind is the personality-belief, the 
ego-illusion. This personality-belief (sakkaya-ditthi), or ego-illusion (atta- 
ditthi), is of two kinds: eternity-belief and annihilation-belief. 


Eternity-belief (sassata-ditthi) is the belief in the existence of a persisting 
ego-entity, soul or personality, existing independently of those physical and 
mental processes that constitute life and continuing even after death. 


Annihilation-belief (uccheda-ditthi), on the other hand, is the belief in the 
existence of an ego-entity or personality as being more or less identical with 
those physical and mental processes, and which therefore, at the dissolution 
at death, will come to be annihilated. For the twenty kinds of personality- 
belief, see sakkaya-ditthi. 


Now, the Buddha neither teaches a personality which will continue after 
death, nor does he teach a personality which will be annihilated at death, but 
he shows us that ‘personality’, ‘ego’, ‘individual’, ‘man’, etc., are nothing but 
mere conventional designations (vohdra-vacana) and that in the ultimate 
sense (see paramattha-sacca) there is only this self-consuming process of 
physical and mental phenomena that continually arise and again disappear 
immediately. For further details, see anatta, khandha, paticca-samuppada. 


“The Perfect One is free from any theory (ditthigata), for the Perfect One 
has seen what corporeality is, and how it arises and passes away. He has seen 
what feeling... perception... mental formations... consciousness are, and 
how they arise and pass away. Therefore I say that the Perfect One has won 
complete deliverance through the extinction, fading away, disappearance, 
rejection and casting out of all imaginings and conjectures, of all inclination 
to the ‘vain-glory of ‘T’ and ‘mine’.” (MN 72) 





56 | DITTHI-NISSITA-SILA 


The rejection of speculative views and theories is a prominent feature in a 
chapter of the Suttanipata, the Atthaka-Vagga. 


Theso-called ‘evilviewswithfixeddestiny’ (niyata-miccha-ditthi) constituting 
the last of the ten unwholesome courses of action (kamma-patha, q.v.), are 
the following three: 


(1) the fatalistic ‘view of the uncausedness' of existence (ahetuka-ditthi), 
taught by Makkhali-Gosala, a contemporary of the Buddha who denied 
every cause for the corruptness and purity of beings, and asserted that 
everything is minutely predestined by fate. 

(2) the ‘view of the inefficacy of action’ (akiriya-ditthi), taught by Purana- 
Kassapa, another contemporary of the Buddha who denied every karmic 
effect of good and bad actions: “To him who kills, steals, robs, etc., nothing 
bad will happen. For generosity, self-restraint and truthfulness, etc., no 
reward is to be expected.” 

(3) nihilism (natthika-ditthi), taught by Ajita-Kesakambali, a third 
contemporary of the Buddha who asserted that any belief in good action and 
its reward is a mere delusion, that after death no further life would follow, 
that man at death would become dissolved into the elements, etc. 


For further details about these three views, see DN 2, MN 60; commentarial 
exposition in Wheel 98/99. 

Frequently mentioned are also the ten antinomies (antaggahika micchā- 
ditthi): ‘Finite is the world’ or ‘infinite is the world’... ‘body and soul are 
identical or ‘body and soul are different’ (e.g. MN 63). 

In the Brahmajala Sutta (DN 1), sixty-two false views are classified and 
described, comprising all conceivable wrong views and speculations about 
man and world. See The All-Embracing Net of Views (Brahmajala Sutta), 
translation with commentary by Bhikkhu Bodhi (BPS). Further see DN 15, 
23, 24, 28; MN 11, 12, 25, 60, 63, 72, 76, 101, 102, 110; AN 2:16; 10:93; SN 
21, 24; Patis Ditthikatha, etc. 

Wrong views (ditthi) are one of the proclivities (see anusaya), cankers (see 
dsava), clingings (see upádana), one of the three modes of perversions (see 
vipallása). Unwholesome consciousness (akusala-citta), rooted in greed, 
may be either with or without wrong views (ditthi-gata-sampayutta or 
vippayutta); see Dhs; Table I. 


On right view (sammd-ditthi), see magga and MN 9 (translation with 
commentary in The Discourse on Right View, by Bhikkhu Nanamoli, Wheel 
377-379.). 


ditthi-nissita-sila: ‘morality based on wrong views’; see nissaya. 


ditthippatta: the ‘vision attainer’, is one of the seven Noble Persons (ariya- 
puggala, q.v.). 


ditthi-vipallasa: ‘perversion of views’; see vipalldsa. 


ditthi-visuddhi: ‘purification of view’ is the third of the seven stages of 
purification (visuddhi III, q.v.). 


DUKKHA | 57 





ditth'upadana: ‘clinging to views’, is one of the four kinds of clinging 
(upadana, q.v.). 


divine abode: see vihara. 

divine ear and eye: see abhififia. 

divine messengers, the three: deva-diita (q.v.). 
doctrine of the Buddha: see dhamma, sdsana. 
dogmatic articles, the three: titthdyatana (q.v.). 


domanassa: lit. ‘sad-mindedness’, grief, ie., mentally painful feeling 
(cetasika-vedaná), is one of the five feelings (vedand, q.v.) and one of the 
twenty-two faculties (indriya, q.v.). According to the Abhidhamma, grief 
is always associated with antipathy and grudge, and therefore karmically 
unwholesome (akusala, q.v.). See Table I, 30, 31. 


domanassupavicara: ‘indulging in grief’; see manopavicara. 


doors of deliverance, the three: vimokkha-dvdra; see vimokkha I; visuddhi 
VI, 8. 


dosa: ‘hatred’, anger, is one of the three unwholesome roots (miila, q.v.). dosa 
citta: hate consciousness; see Table I (30, 31). 


dosa-carita: ‘angry-or hate-natured’; see carita. 
doubt, sceptical: vicikiccháà (q.v.), kankhd (q.v.). 
dread, moral: ottappa; see hiri-ottappa. 
drinking intoxicants: see surameraya. 
dry-visioned: see sukkha-vipassaka. 


duccarita: ‘evil conduct’, is threefold — in deeds, words, and thoughts. See 
kamma-patha (1). 


duggati: ‘woeful course’ (of existence); see gati. 


dukkha: (1) ‘pain’, painful feeling, which may be bodily and mental (see 
vedana). 


(2) ‘suffering’, ‘ill’. As the first of the Four Noble Truths (see sacca) and the 
second of the three characteristics of existence (see ti-lakkhana), the term 
dukkha is not limited to painful experience as under (1), but refers to the 
unsatisfactory nature and the general insecurity ofall conditioned phenomena 
which, on account of their impermanence, are all liable to suffering, and this 
includes also pleasurable experience. Hence ‘unsatisfactoriness’ or ‘liability 
to suffering’ would be more adequate renderings, if not for stylistic reasons. 
Hence the first truth does not deny the existence of pleasurable experience, 
as is sometimes wrongly assumed. This is illustrated by the following texts: 


“Seeking satisfaction in the world, monks, I had pursued my way. That 
satisfaction in the world I found. In so far as satisfaction existed in the world, 





58 | DUKKHANUPASSANA 


Thave well perceived it by wisdom. Seeking for misery in the world, monks, 
Thad pursued my way. That misery in the world I found. In so far as misery 
existed in the world, I have well perceived it by wisdom. Seeking for the 
escape from the world, monks, I had pursued my way. That escape from 
the world I found. In so far as an escape from the world existed, I have well 
perceived it by wisdom” (AN 3:101). 


“If there were no satisfaction to be found in the world, beings would not be 
attached to the world... If there were no misery to be found in the world, 
beings would not be repelled by the world... If there were no escape from 
the world, beings could not escape therefrom” (AN 3:102). 


See dukkhata. For texts on the Truth of Suffering, see WB and PD. See also The 
Three Basic Facts of Existence, II. Suffering (Wheel 191/193). 


dukkhanupassana: see vipassand. 


dukkhata (abstr. noun fr. dukkha): ‘the state of suffering’, painfulness, 
unpleasantness, the unsatisfactoriness of existence. "There are three kinds 
of suffering: (1) suffering as pain (dukkhadukkhata), (2) the suffering 
inherent in the formations (sarkharadukkhatà), (3) the suffering in change 
(viparinamadukkhata)” (SN 45:165; DN 33). 


(1) is the bodily or mental feeling of pain as actually felt. (2) refers to the 
oppressive nature of all formations of existence (ie., all conditioned 
phenomena), due to their continual arising and passing away; this includes 
also experiences associated with neutral feeling. (3) refers to bodily and 
mental pleasant feelings, *because they are the cause for the arising of pain 
when they change" (Vism XIV, 34ff.). 


dukkha-patipada: ‘painful progress’; see patipada. 
dvi-hetuka-patisandhi: see patisandhi. 


dwellings: suitable dwellings for monks; see sendsana. Satisfied with 
whatever dwellings; see dhutanga. 





EARNESTNESS | 59 


earnestness: appamdda (q.v.). 
earth-element: see dhātu (I). 
eating, knowing the measure in: bhojane mattafifiutà (q.v.). 


effort, the four right efforts: samma-ppadhdana; see padhana. Right effort, 
see sacca (IV 6), magga (6). Five elements of effort: padhdniyanga (q.v.). 


ego-entity: attá (q.v.). 

ego-belief: see ditthi, sakkaya-ditthi, vipallasa. 
ego-idea, ego-perception: see vipalldsa. 
egolessness: anattá (q.v.). 

eightfold path: see magga. 


eka-biji: ‘germinating only once more’, is the name for one of the three kinds 
of stream-winners: see sotdpanna. 


ekasanik'anga: the exercise of eating at one sitting, is one of the ascetic 
practices; see dhutarga. 


eka-vokara-bhava: one-group existence, is the existence of the unconscious 
beings (asafifia-satta, q.v.) as they possess only the corporeality-group. See 
catu-vokàra-bhava, pafica-voküra-bhava. 


elasticity (of corporeality, mental factors or consciousness): mudutd; see 
khandha (Summary of the Five Groups, I, B) and Table II. 


elders, the teaching of the: Theravdda (q.v.). 
elements: dhàtu (q.v.). Analysis ofthe four elements: dhdatu-vavatthana (q.v.). 


emotion: eight sources of emotion: samvega-vatthu (q.v.). The four places 
rousing emotion; samvejaniya-tthàána (q.v.). 


emptiness: suññatā (q.v.). Contemplation of emptiness: sufifiatanupassand. 
For emptiness of self, pertaining to the four truths, see sacca. 


ends: ‘attaining two ends simultaneously’, sama-sisi (q.v.). 
energy: viriya (q.v.); further see bojjhanga, bala, parami. 
enlightened one, the: Buddha; see sammd-sambuddha. 


enlightenment: bodhi(q.v.). The sevenelements of enlightenment: bojjhanga 
(q.v.). A being destined for enlightenment: Bodhisatta (q.v.). 


enthusiasm: piti (q.v.). 





60 | ENVY 


envy: issd (q.v.). 
equality-conceit: see māna. 


equanimity: upekkhá(q.v.) 2 tatra-majjhattatà (q.v.). Knowledgeconsistingin 
equanimity with regard to all formations, see visuddhi (VI, 8). Indulging in 
equanimity, see manopavicara. 


equilibrium of mental faculties: indriya-samatta (q.v.). 
escape: nissarana; see pahàna. 

eternity: See kappa. 

eternity-belief: sassata-ditthi; see ditthi. 


exertion: see padhana, viriya, magga (6). Reaching Nibbana with or without 
exertion; see andgami. 


existence: bhava (q.v.). The five groups of existence: khandha (q.v.). The four 
substrata of existence: upadhi (q.v.). Courses of existence: gati (q.v.). Wheel of 
existence: samsdra (q.v.). Craving for existence: bhava-tanhd; see tanha. The 
three characteristics of existence: ti-lakkhana (q.v.). 


expression (bodily and verbal): see vijifiatti. 

extinction: see nirodha; extinction of craving: tanhakkhaya (q.v.). 
extremes: the two extremes and the middle path; see majjhima patipada. 
eye: five kinds, see cakkhu. Visual organ, see dyatana. 


eye-consciousness: cakkhu-vififiana; see dhatu, khandha. 


eye-organ: see ayatana. 





FACTORS | 61 


F 


factors, mental: see cetasika. Factors of absorption, see jhdna. Factors of 
enlightenment, see bojjhanga. 


faculties: indriya (q.v.); see also paccaya 16. 

fading away: see virdga. 

faith: saddhá (q.v.). 

faith-devotee and faith-liberated one: see ariya-puggala (B). 
faithful-natured: saddhd-carita; see carita. 

fatalism: see ditthi. 

favor, four ways of showing: see sarigaha-vatthu. 


feeling: vedand (q.v); further see khandha. Contemplation of feeling: 
vedanàánupassaná; see satipatthana. 


femininity: see bhava, indriya. 
fetters: the ten fetters binding to existence; see samyojana. 
few wishes: see appicchata. 


fine-material sphere or world: see avacara, loka. Absorptions of the fine- 
material sphere or world: rijpajjhdna; see jhana. 


fire-element: see dhàtu (I). 


fivefold sense-door, advertence to the: paficadvaràvajjana; see vififiana- 
kicca. 


five-group existence: pafica-voküra-bhava (q.v.). 

fixed destiny: see niyata-miccha-ditthi, niyata-puggala. 

fixity: see niyama, tathatà, dhammatthiti-nana. 

floods, the four: ogha (q.v.); identical with the four cankers (asava, q.v.). 


food, material: is one of the four nutriments (ahàra, q.v.). Food-produced 
corporeality, see samutthdna. Refusing all further food, see dhutanga. 
Loathsomeness of food, see ahdre patikküla-safifía. 


foolish babble: samphappalüpa; see karma, kamma-patha (1); see 
tiracchana-katha. 


forbearance: khanti (q.v.). 


forest-dweller, the ascetic practice for the: see dhutanga. 





62 | FORMATION 


formation: sarkhàra (q.v.). 


foundation: nissaya, one of the twenty-four conditions (paccaya, q.v.). 
Wrong foundation of morality see nissaya. Foundation of sympathy: 
sangaha-vatthu (q.v.). Foundation-forming absorptions: padakajjhàna (q.v.); 
Foundation of an arahat's mentality: see adhitthàna. 


foundations of mindfulness, the four: satipatthdna (q.v.). 

four-group existence: catu-voküra-bhava (q.v.). 

freedom of will, problem of the: See paticca-samuppada (X). 

friend, noble: kalyána-mitta (q.v.). 

frivolous talk: see tiracchüna-kathà, kamma-patha (I, 7), karma, miccha- 
vaca. 

fruition (result of supermundane path): phala; see ariya-puggala (A). 
fruits of monk-life: sīmañña-phala (q.v.) 

full comprehension: pariññā (q.v.). 


functional consciousness, or consciousness functioning independently 
of karma: kiriya-citta (q.v.); see vififiána-kicca. 


functions of consciousness: vi/ifiána-kicca (q.v.). 





GANTHA | 63 


G 


gantha: ‘tie’. “There are four ties: the bodily tie (kaya-gantha) of covetousness 
(abhijjha), of ill will (vyapada), of clinging to rule and ritual (silabbata- 
paramasa), of dogmatical fanaticism (idamsaccabhinivesa)” (DN 33). "These 
things are ties, since they tie this mental and material body” (Vism XXII, 54). 


garuka-kamma: ‘weighty karma’; see karma. 


gati (lit. ‘going’): ‘course of existence’, destiny, destination. “There are five 
courses of existence: hell, animal kingdom, ghost realm, human world, 
heavenly world” (DN 33; AN 11:68). Of these, the first three count as woeful 
courses (duggati, see apáya), the latter two as happy courses (sugati). 


gems, the three: ti-ratana (q.v.). 
generation, the four modes of: yoni (q.v.). 


germinating once more: eka-biji, is the name of one of the three kinds of 
sotàpanna (q.v.). 


ghosts: see peta, yakkha; see loka. 

giving: dana (q.v.). 

gladness: somanassa (q.v.). Indulging in gladness, see manopavicara. 
gnosis: see indriya (21). 


gotrabhü: lit. ‘who has entered the lineage (of the Noble Ones)’, i.e., the 
Matured One. 


(1) ‘Maturity-moment’ (gotrabhii-citta) is the last of the four impulsive 
moments (javana, q.v; see vififidna-kicca) immediately preceding the 
entering into an absorption (jhàna, q.v.) or into one of the supermundane 
paths (see ariya-puggala, A). See visuddhi VII. 


(2) The ‘Matured One’. “He who is endowed with those things, immediately 
upon which follows the entrance into the noble path (ariya-magga), this 
person is called a ‘Matured One’.” (Pug 10). In the commentary to this 
passage it is said: “He who through perceiving Nibbana, leaves behind the 
whole multitude of worldlings (puthujjana, q.v.), the family of worldlings, 
the circle of worldlings, the designation of a worldling and enters into 
the multitude of the Noble Ones, the family of the Noble Ones, the circle 
of the Noble Ones, and obtains the designation of a Noble One, such a 
being is called a Matured One.” By this state of consciousness is meant the 
lightning-like transitional stage between the state of a worldling and that of 
a sotapanna; see ariya-puggala. Gotrabhi is mentioned in this sense, i.e., as 
the ninth ariya-puggala (q.v.), in AN 9:10; 10:16. 


Source note: As a citta only found in the commentaries; see javana. As a 
dhamma arising by the practice of samatha (i.e. the eight concentration 





64 | GOTRABHU-NANA 


attainments; see samapatti) and vipassana (the maggas and phalas, 

and the attainments of abiding in emptiness and signlessness; see 
vimokkha), found in the Patisambhidamagga (Ch. 10). As a condition 
(paccaya, between the conditions of anuloma and vodàna) for the magga 
and phala attainments, found in the Patthana. 


gotrabhü-fíana: ‘maturity-knowledge’; see gotrabhiü, visuddhi (VID. 
gradual instruction: Gnupubbi-katha (q.v.). 

grasping: See pardmdsa, upaádàna. 

great man, the eight thoughts of a: mahdpurisavitakka (q.v.). 
greed: lobha (q.v.). 

greedy consciousness: see Tables, I, III (22-29). 

greedy-natured: rága-carita; see carita. 

grief: domanassa (q.v.). Indulging in grief, see manopavicara. 


groups: of existence, see khandha; corporeal groups, see rüpa-kalapa; 
corporeality-group, see riipa-káya; mind-group, see ndma-kaya. 


growth, bodily: riipassa upacaya: see khandha I. 
grudge: see patigha. 


gustatory organ: see dyatana. 





HABITUAL KARMA | 65 


H 


habitual karma: bahula-kamma, see karma. 


hadaya-vatthu: ‘heart as physical base’ of mental life. The heart, according 
to the commentaries as well as to the general Buddhist tradition, forms the 
physical base (vatthu) of consciousness. In the canonical texts, however, 
even in the Abhidhamma Pitaka, no such base is ever localised, a fact which 
seems to have first been discovered by Shwe Zan Aung (Abhidh-s-Tr, pp. 
277ff.). In the Patthana we find repeatedly only the passage: “That material 
thing based on which mind-element and mind-consciousness element 
function” (yam rüpam nissdya manodhatu ca manovinnhdna-dhatu ca vattanti, 
tam rüpam). 


hana-bhagiya-sila,hana-bhagiya-samadhi,hana-bhagiya-paíifía: morality, 
concentration or wisdom connected with decline. The other three stages 
are: thiti-bhdagiya-sila, etc., morality, etc., connected with a standstill; 
visesa-bhagiya-sila, etc., morality, etc., connected with progress; nibbedha- 
bhàgiya-sila, etc., morality, etc., connected with penetration. See AN 4:179; 
6:71, 10:71. 

“Decline’ (hana) is to be understood with regard to the arising of opposing 
qualities, ‘standstill (rhiti) with regard to the standstill of the corresponding 
attentiveness, ‘progress’ (visesa) withregardtohigherexcellency, ‘penetration’ 
(nibbedha) with regard to the arising of perception and reflection connected 
with the turning away (from existence)” (Vism III). See voddna (2). 


happiness, feeling of: see sukha. The idea of happiness (of the world): 
see vipallasa. 


happy courses of existence: see gati. 
harmlessness: see avihimsd. 


hasituppada-citta: lit. ‘consciousness producing mirth (smile), is found in 
the Abhidhammattha-sangaha as a name for the joyful mind-consciousness 
element (manovififiana-dhatu, Table I, 72) arising as functional consciousness 
independent of karma (kiriya-citta), only in the arahat. 


Source note: This term is used in Abhidh-s for the citta, Table I, 72. 
This type of consciousness (the Buddha' smile) is often implied in the 
Suttas. 


hate and hatelessness: (dosa, adosa) are two of the six karmic roots (mila, 
q.v.) or root-conditions (hetu; paccaya 1). 


hate-rooted consciousness: see Table I, 30, 31. 


hate-natured: dosa-carita; see carita. 





66 | HEALTH-INFATUATION 


health-infatuation: see mada. 
hearer (disciple): savaka (q.v.). 
heat-element: tejo-dhdtu; see dhátu. 
hell: niraya (q.v.). 


hetu: ‘cause’, condition, reason; (Abhidhamma) root-condition. In Suttausage 
itis almost synonymous with paccaya, ‘condition’, and often occurs together 
with it (‘What is the cause, what is the condition’, ko hetu ko paccayo?). 


In Abhidhamma, it denotes the wholesome and unwholesome roots (miila, 
q.v.). In that sense, as ‘root-condition’ (hetu-paccaya; see paccaya), it is the 
first of the twenty-four conditions given in the introduction to the Patthana 
(see Guide Ch. VII). The Dhs ($8 1052-1082) and Patthana (Dukapatth; 
Guide Ch. VII) have sections on roots (hetu). The term is also used (a) for the 
classification of consciousness, as sa-hetuka and a-hetuka, with and without 
concomitant root-conditions; (b) for a division of rebirth-consciousness 
into ahetuka, dvihetuka and tihetuka, without, with two, or with three root- 
conditions (see patisandhi). 


For ahetuka-ditthi, the false view of the uncausedness of existence, see ditthi. 
higher wisdom: clear insight based on higher wisdom: see vipassand. 
Training in higher wisdom, see sikkha. 

highest knowledge: see afd. 

hindrances, the five: nivarana (q.v.). 

hiri-ottappa: moralshameandmoraldread' ,areassociated withallkarmically 
wholesome consciousness (see Table II). 


"To be ashamed of what one ought to be ashamed of, to be ashamed of 
performing evil and unwholesome things: this is called moral shame. To be 
in dread of what one ought to be in dread of, to be in dread of performing 
evil and unwholesome things: this is called moral dread" (Pug 79, 80). 


"Two lucid things, O monks, protect the world: moral shame and moral 
dread. If these two things were not to protect the world, then one would 
respect neither one’s mother, nor one’s mother's sister, nor one’s brother's 
wife, nor one’s teacher's wife..." (AN 2:7). See ahirika. See AsTr 164ff. 


homelessness, going into: pabbajjà (q.v.). See progress of the disciple. 


human world: See loka, gati. 





IDDHI | 67 


iddhi: ‘power’, ‘magical power’. The magical powers constitute one of the 
six kinds of higher spiritual powers (abhiññā, q.v.). One distinguishes many 
kinds of magical powers: the power of determination (adhitthan 'iddhi), 
i.e., the power of becoming oneself manifold; the power of transformation 
(vikubbana-iddhi), i.e., the power of adopting another form; the power of 
spiritual creation (manomaya-iddhi), i.e., the power of letting issue from this 
body another mentally produced body; the power of penetrating knowledge 
(iána-vipphara-iddhi), i.e., the power of inherent insight to remain unhurt in 
danger; the power of penetrating concentration (samddhi-vipphara-iddhi) 
producing the same result. The magical powers are treated in detail in 
Vism XII; Patis, Vibh. They arenotanecessary condition for final deliverance. 


‘Noble power’ (ariya-iddhi) is the power of controlling one’s ideas in such 
a way that one may consider something not repulsive as repulsive and 
something repulsive as not repulsive, and remain all the time imperturbable 
and full of equanimity. This training of mind is frequently mentioned in the 
Suttas (e.g. MN 152, AN 5:144), but only once the name of ariya-iddhi is 
applied to it (DN 28). See further Patis: Iddhikatha, Vism XII. 


Source note: Most, or perhaps all, of the ten terms listed at Vism XII, as 
adhitthàna, etc., are absent in the older Sutta texts. In Patis (II, 205—214), 
however, they are enumerated in due order and minutely explained. The 
magical powers indicated by these terms are, nevertheless, for the most 
part explicitly described already in the oldest Sutta texts. See DN 34; 
MN 3; AN 3:99 etc. 


iddhi-pada: ‘roads to power’ (or success) consist of the following four 
qualities: 


“For as guides, they indicate the road to power connected therewith; and 
because they form, by way of preparation, the roads to the power constituting 
the fruition of the path’ (Vism XII), namely: “concentration of intention 
(chanda-samádhi) accompanied by effort of will (padhdana-sankhdra- 
samanndagata), concentration of energy (viriya-samadhi)... concentration 
of consciousness (citta-samddhi)... and concentration of investigation 
(vimamsa-samadhi) accompanied by effort of will.” 

As such, they are supermundane (/okuttara, i.e., connected with the path 
or the fruition of the path; see ariya-puggala). But they are mundane 
(lokiya, q.v.) as predominant factors (adhipati; see paccaya 3), for it is 
said: "Because the monk, through making intention a predominant factor, 
reaches concentration, it is called the concentration of intention (chanda- 
samādhi), etc." (Vism XII)."These four roads of power lead to the attaining 
and acquiring of magical power, to the power of magical transformation, 
to the generation of magical power, and to mastery and skill therein" 
(Patis II, 205, PTS). For a detailed explanation, see Vism XII. 





68 | IGNORANCE 


“Once the monk has thus developed and often practised the four roads 
to power, he enjoys various magical powers,... hears with the divine ear 
heavenly and human sounds,... perceives with his mind the mind of other 
beings... remembers many a former existence... perceives with the divine 
eye beings passing away and reappearing,... attains, after the extinction 
of cankers, deliverance of mind and deliverance through wisdom, free 
from cankers...” (SN 51:2). For a detailed explanation of these six higher 
powers, see abhinna. 


“Whosoever, O monks, has missed the four roads to power, he has missed the 
right path leading to the extinction of suffering; but whosoever, O monks, 
has reached the four roads to power, he has reached the right path leading 
to the extinction of suffering’ (SN 51:2). 


See the chapter on iddhipdda in The Requisites of Enlightenment by Ledi 
Sayadaw (Wheel 171/174). 


ignorance: avijjd (q.v.); further see paticca-samuppdda (1). 


ill-humour, heavenly beings who come to grief through: mano-padosika- 
deva (q.v.). 


ill will: vyapdda, is a synonym of dosa (see miila) and patigha and is one 
of the ten fetters (samyojana, q.v.), five hindrances (nivarana, q.v.) and ten 
unwholesome courses of action (see kamma-patha, I). 


image, mental: see nimitta, samadhi, kasina. 
immaterial sphere: aripávacara: See avacara, jhana (5—8); Table I. 
immaterial world: arüpa-loka; see loka. 


immediacy: an alternative rendering for  contiguity-condition, 
samanantara-paccaya, which is one of the twenty-four conditions 
(paccaya, q.v.). 


immediate, the: dnantariya (q.v.). 
immortality: see amata. 
imperfections: see upakkilesa. 


impermanence: anicca (q.v). Contemplation of impermanence, see 
vipassana (1). 


impersonality of existence: see anatta. Contemplation of: see vipassand (3). 
imperturbable karma-formations: dnefijabhisankhdara; see sankhara. 
impression, sensorial or mental: phassa (q.v.). 

impulsion: javana (q.v.). 

impurities: see upakkilesa. 


impurity of the body, contemplation of the: see asubha, sivathika. 





INDRIYA | 69 


inclinations: see anusaya. 

independently enlightened: pacceka-buddha (q.v.). 
indifferent feeling: see vedand, upekkha. 
individual: puggala (q.v.). 


indriya: ‘faculties’, is a term for twenty-two partly physical, partly mental, 
phenomena often treated in the Suttas as well as in the Abhidhamma. They 
are: 

(1) eye: cakkhu 

(2) ear: sota 

(3) nose: ghana : - 
(4) tongue: jivhā Six Bases (Gyatana, q.v.) 
(5) body: kaya 
(6) mind: mano J 


(7) femininity: itthi 
(8)  masculinity: purisa Sex (bhàva, q.v.) P 
(9) vitality: jivita 

(10) bodily pleasant feeling: sukha 
(11) bodily pain: dukkha 

(12) gladness: somanassa Five Feelings (vedana, q. v.) 
(13) sadness: domanassa 

(14) indifference: upekkha 


(15) faith: saddha 
(16) energy: viriya Five Spiritual Faculties 
(17) mindfulness: sati (see bala) 
(18) concentration: samādhi 
(19) wisdom: paññā 

the assurance: ‘I shall know what 
(20) I did not yet know!': aññātañ- 


fiassamit indriya Three Supermundane 
Q1) the faculty of highest knowledge: Faculties 

aññindriya 
(22) the faculty of him who knows: 





afifiatavindriya. 


(1-5, 7-8) are physical; (9) is either physical or mental. All the rest are mental. 
(14) (see upekkhd) is here merely indifferent feeling (= adukkha-m-asukha 
vedaná, i.e., ‘neither pleasant nor unpleasant feeling’) and not identical with 
that highly ethical state of equanimity (= tatra-majjhattatd, i.e., “keeping 
everywhere the middle’, the equipoise of mind), also called upekkha which 





70 | INDRIYA-PACCAYA 


belongs to the group of mental formations (sarkhüra-kkhandha; see Table II). 
(20) arises at the moment of entering the sotapatti-path (sotapatti-magga), 
(21) on reaching the sotapatti-fruition (sotapatti-phala), (22) at attaining the 
arahat-fruition (arahatta-phala). For the three last, see ariya-puggala. 


The faculties, excepting (7) and (8), form one of the twenty-four conditions 
(paccaya 16, q.v.). 


In Vibh V all these faculties are treated in the above order, whereas SN 48 
enumerates and explains them by way of the above indicated groups, 
leaving only 20-22 unexplained. See Vism XVI; PD § 138ff. For the five 
spiritual faculties (15—19), see The Way of Wisdom (Wheel 65/66). 


indriya-paccaya: see paccaya 16. 


indriya-samatta: ‘equilibrium, balance, or harmony of faculties’, relates 
to the five spiritual faculties: faith, energy, mindfulness, concentration 
and wisdom (see indriya 15—19). Of these there are two pairs of faculties, 
in each of which both faculties should well counterbalance each other, 
namely: faith and wisdom (saddhd, pajifid, q.v.) on the one hand and 
energy and concentration (viriya, samadhi, q.v.) on the other. For excessive 
faith with deficient wisdom leads to blind belief, while excessive wisdom 
with deficient faith leads to cunning. In the same way, great energy with 
weak concentration leads to restlessness, while strong concentration with 
deficient energy leads to indolence. Though for both faculties in each of the 
two pairs a balanced degree of intensity is desirable, mindfulness should be 
allowed to develop to the highest degree of strength. See Vism III. 


Source note: This term is found for the first time in the Commentaries, 
esp. Vism IV. The rudiments of this doctrine, however, are already 
found in the old Sutta texts, e.g. AN 3:100, AN 6:55, MN 85. 


indriya-samvara-sila: ‘morality consisting of purity of restraint of the 
senses’; see sila. 


indriyesu gutta-dvarata: ‘guarding the sense-doors' is identical with sense- 
control (indriya-samvara; see sila). 


in-and-out-breathing, watching over: anàápana-sati (q.v.). 


inducement: an alternative rendering for decisive-support condition, 
upanissaya, is one of the twenty-four conditions (paccaya, q.v.). 


indulging (in joy, sadness etc.): see manopavicara. 
ineffective karma: see karma. 
infatuation: see mada, moha (see müla), avijjà. 


inference of meaning: an ‘expression the meaning of which is to be inferred’, 
neyyattha-dhamma (q.v.). Antonym: ‘expression with an established 
meaning’, nitattha-dhamma (see neyyattha-dhamma). 





ITTHINDRIYA | 71 


inferiority-conceit: see māna. 

influxes (cankers), the four: dsava (q.v.). 

inoperative consciousness, karmically: see kiriya-citta. 

inseparable mental factors, the seven inseparable mental factors in all 
consciousness: see cetand, phassa, nama. 

insight: see paññā, vipassana, nana. 

intelligent-natured: see carita. 

intention: chanda (q.v.). 

interest: piti (q.v.); see Table II. 

intimation: see viññatti. 

intoxicants: see ásava. 

intoxicating drinks, the evil effect of taking: see surümeraya. 
investigating function (of consciousness): santirana; see vififiána-kicca. 


investigation, full understanding through: tiranaparififía; see parififia. 
‘Investigation’ (vimamsa) is one of the four roads to power (iddhipada, q.v.) 
and one of the four predominants (adhipati; see paccaya 3). investigation 
of truth: dhamma-vicaya, is one of the seven factors of enlightenment 
(bojjhanga, q.v.). 


iriya-patha (lit. ‘ways of movement’): “bodily postures’, i.e., going, standing, 
sitting, lying. In the Satipatthana Sutta (see satipatthadna), they form the 
subject of a contemplation and an exercise in mindfulness. 


“While going, standing, sitting or lying down, the monk knows ‘Igo’, ‘Istand’, 
‘I sit’, ‘I lie down’; he understands any position of the body.” “The disciple 
understands that there is no living being, no real ego, that goes, stands, etc., 
but that it is by a mere figure of speech that one says: ‘I go’, ‘I stand’, and so 
forth.” (Com). 


issa: ‘envy’, is a karmically unwholesome (akusala) mental factor, which 
is occasionally associated with hate-rooted consciousness (see Table I, 30, 
31). Explained in Pug 55. 


itthindriya: ‘femininity’; see bhava. 





72 | JANAKA-KAMMA 


janaka-kamma: ‘regenerative karma’; see karma. 


jara: ‘old age, decay’, is one of the three divine messengers (see deva-dita, 
q.v.). For its conditioning by birth, see paticca-samuppada (11). 


jati: ‘birth’, comprises the entire embryonic process beginning with 
conception and ending with parturition. 

“The birth of beings belonging to this or that order of beings, their being born, 
their conception (okkanti) and springing into existence, the manifestation 
of the groups (corporeality feeling, perception, mental formations, 
consciousness; see khandha), the acquiring of their sensitive organs: this 
is called birth" (DN 22). For its conditioning by the prenatal karma-process 
(kamma-bhava; see bhava), see paticca-samuppada (9, 10), patisandhi. 


javana (fr. javati, to impel): ‘impulsion’, is the phase of full cognition in 
the cognitive series, or perceptual process (citta-vithi; see vififiana-kicca) 
occurring at its climax, if the respective object is large or distinct. It is 
at this phase that karma is produced, i.e., wholesome or unwholesome 
volition concerning the perception that was the object of the previous 
stages of the respective process of consciousness. There are normally seven 
impulsive moments. In mundane consciousness (/okiya, q.v), any of the 
seventeen karmically wholesome classes of consciousness (Table I, 1-17) 
or of the twelve unwholesome ones (Table I, 22-23) may arise at the phase 
of impulsion. For the arahat, however, impulsion has no longer a karmic, 
i.e., rebirth-producing character, but is a karmically independent function 
(kiriya, q.v.; Table I, 72—89). There are further eight supermundane classes of 
impulsion (Table I, 18-21, 66—69). 


The four impulsive moments immediately before entering an absorption 
(hüna, q.v.) or one of the supermundane paths (magga; see ariya-puggala) 
are: the preparatory (parikamma), approach (upacára), adaptation 
(anuloma), and maturity-moment (gotrabhü, q.v). In connection with 
entering the earth-kasina absorption (see kasina), they are explained as 
follows, in Vism IV: "After the breaking off of the subconscious stream 
of being (bhavanga-sota, q.v.), there arises the 'advertence at the mind- 
door’ (manodváàravajjana, see vififiana-kicca), taking as object the earth- 
kasina (while thinking), ‘Earth! Earth!’ Thereupon, four or five impulsive 
moments flash forth, amongst which the last one (maturity-moment) 
belongs to the fine-material sphere (riipavacara), whereas the rest belong 
to the sense-sphere (kamavacara; see avacara), though the last one is more 
powerful in thought conception, discursive thinking, interest (rapture), joy 
and concentration (see jhana) than the states of consciousness belonging 
to the sense-sphere. They are called ‘preparatory’ (parikamma-samadhi), 
as they are preparing for the attainment-concentration (appanàá-samádhi); 





JHANA | 73 


‘approaching’ (upacdra-samddhi), as they are close to the attainment- 
concentration and are moving in its neighbourhood; ‘adaptive’ (anuloma), 
as they adapt themselves to the preceding preparatory states and to the 
succeeding attainment concentration. The last one of the four is called 
‘matured’ (gotrabhi). In a similar way, the impulsive moments before 
reaching the divine ear are described in Vism XIII, 1. See karma. 


Source note: The only reference in the Sutta Pitaka is Patis II, 73: 
kusalakammassa javana-khane, “in the impulsion-moment of a 
wholesome karma.” In the Abhidhamma Pitaka the word is not 
mentioned. The teaching of the flashing forth of four javanas 
immediately before entering the jhdna or lokuttara-magga, i.e., 
parikamma, upacára, anuloma, gotrabhii is, as such, without doubt a 
later development in the commentarial literature. 


jewels, the three: ti-ratana (q.v.). 


jhàna: 'absorption' (meditation) refers chiefly to the four meditative 
absorptions of the fine-material sphere (ripajhüna or rüpàávacara-jhàna; 
see avacara). They are achieved through the attainment of full (or attainment, 
or ecstatic) concentration (appand, see samādhi), during which there is a 
complete, though temporary, suspension of fivefold sense-activity and of 
the five hindrances (see nivarana). The state of consciousness, however, 
is one of full alertness and lucidity. This high degree of concentration 
is generally developed by the practice of one of the forty subjects of 
tranquillity meditation (samatha-kammatthana; see bhāvanā). Often also 
the four immaterial spheres (arüpayatana) are called absorptions of the 
immaterial sphere (arüpajhana or ariipdvacara-jhana). The text often met 
with in the Suttas runs as follows: 


(1) “Detached from sensual objects, O monks, detached from unwholesome 
consciousness, attached with thought-conception (vitakka) and discursive 
thinking (vicdra), born of detachment (vivekaja), and filled with rapture 
(piti) and joy (sukha) he enters the first absorption. 


(2) “After the subsiding of thought-conception and discursive thinking, and 
by gaining inner tranquillity and oneness of mind, he enters into a state free 
from thought-conception and discursive thinking, the second absorption, 
which is born of concentration (samadhi), and filled with rapture (piti) and 
joy (sukha). 

(3) "After the fading away of rapture he dwells in equanimity, mindful, 
clearly conscious; and he experiences in his person that feeling of which the 
Noble Ones say, ‘Happy lives the man of equanimity and attentive mind’; 
thus he enters the third absorption. 


(4) “After having given up pleasure and pain, and through the disappearance 
of previous joy and grief, he enters into a state beyond pleasure and pain, 
into the fourth absorption, which is purified by equanimity (upekkha) and 
mindfulness. 





74 | JHANA 


(5) “Through the total overcoming of the perceptions of matter, however, 
and through the vanishing of sense-reactions, and the non-attention to the 
perceptions of variety, with the idea, ‘Boundless is space’, he reaches the 
sphere of boundless space (akasanaficayatana) and abides therein. 


“By ‘perceptions of matter’ (riijpa-safifid) are meant the absorptions of the 
fine-material sphere, as well as those objects themselves...” (Vism X, 1). 


“By ‘perceptions of sense-reactions’ (patigha-safifid) are meant those 
perceptions that have arisen due to the impact of sense organs (eye, etc.) and 
the sense-objects (visible objects, etc.). They are a name for the perception 
of visible objects, as it is said (Jhana Vibhanga): ‘What are here the 
perceptions of sense-reactions? They are the perceptions of visible objects, 
sounds, etc.’ Surely, they do no longer exist even for one who has entered 
the first absorption, etc., for at such a time the five-sense consciousness is 
no longer functioning. Nevertheless, this is to be understood as having been 
said in praise of this immaterial absorption, in order to incite the striving 
for it” (Vism X, 16). 

“Perceptions of variety (nanatta-safiííía) are the perceptions that arise in 
various fields, or the various perceptions” (ibid.). Hereby, according to 
Vism X, 20, are meant the multiform perceptions outside the absorptions. 


(6) “Through the total overcoming of the sphere of boundless space, and with 
the idea ‘Boundless is consciousness’, he reaches the sphere of boundless 
consciousness (vififianaficayatana) and abides therein. 


(7) "Through the total overcoming of the sphere of boundless consciousness, 
and with the idea ‘Nothing is there’, he reaches the sphere of nothingness 
(akificafifíayatana) and abides therein. 


(8) "Through the total overcoming of the sphere of nothingness he reaches 
the sphere of neither-perception-nor-non-perception (nevasafifia-n'asafifia- 
yatana) and abides therein." 

“Thus the first absorption is free from five things (i.e. the hindrances, 
nivarana, q.v.), and five things are present (i.e., the factors of absorption; 
jhánanga). Whenever the monk enters the first absorption, there have 
vanished sensuous desire, ill will, sloth and torpor, restlessness and scruples, 
doubts; and there are present: thought-conception (vitakka), discursive 
thinking (vicdra), rapture (piti), joy (sukha), and concentration (samādhi). 
In the second absorption there are present: rapture, joy and concentration; 
in the third: joy and concentration; in the fourth: equanimity (upekkha) and 
concentration" (Vism IV). 


The four absorptions of the immaterial sphere (see above 5-8) still belong, 
properly speaking, to the fourth absorption as they possess the same two 
constituents. The fourth fine-material absorption is also the base or starting 
point (pddaka-jhana, q.v.) for the attaining of the higher spiritual powers 
(abhiññā, q.v.). 

In the Abhidhamma, generally a fivefold instead of a fourfold division of 
the fine-material absorptions is used: the second absorption has still the 





JOY | 75 


constituent ‘discursive thinking’ (but without thought-conception), while 
the third, fourth and fifth correspond to the second, third, and fourth, 
respectively, of the fourfold division (see Table I, 9-13). This fivefold division 
is based on such Sutta texts as AN 8:63. 


For the eight absorptions as objects for the development of insight 
(vipassana), see samatha-vipassand; full details are given in Vism IV-X. 


Jhàna in its widest sense (e.g., as one of the twenty-four conditions; 
see paccaya 17), denotes any—even momentary or weak—absorption of 
mind, when directed on a single object. 


jhananga: ‘constituents (or factors) of absorption’; see jhdna. 
jhana-paccaya: one of the twenty-four conditions (paccaya, q.v.). 


jiva: ‘life’, ‘vital principle’, ‘individual soul’. ‘Soul (life) and body are 
identical and ‘soul and body are different’, these two frequently quoted 
wrong views fall under the two kinds of personality-belief (sakkdya-ditthi; 
see ditthi), i.e., the first one under the annihilation-belief (uccheda-ditthi) 
and the second under the eternity-belief (sassata-ditthi). 


“Verily, if one holds the view that the soul (life) is identical with the body, 
in that case a holy life is not possible; or if one holds the view that the soul 
(life) is something quite different, also in that case a holy life is impossible. 
Both these extremes the Perfect One has avoided and shown the Middle 
Doctrine, which says: “On ignorance depend the karma-formations, on the 
karma-formations depends consciousness’, etc.” (SN 11:35). 


jivitaandjivitindriya: ‘life, vitality’ may beeitherphysical(ripa-jivitindriya) 
or mental (nàma-jivitindriya). The latter is one of the mental factors 
inseparably associated with all consciousness; see ndma, cetand, phassa. 


jivita-navaka-kalapa: ninefold vital group; see ripakalapa. 


joy: somanassa (q.v.). Altruistic joy: mudità (see brahma-vihara). 





76 | KABALINKARAHARA 


K 


kabalinkarahara: lit. ‘food formed into balls’, i.e., food formed into mouthfuls 
for eating (according to Indian custom); it denotes ‘material food’ and 
belongs, together with the three mental nutriments, to the group of four 
nutriments (see ahara). 

kalapa, ‘group’, ‘unit’: (1) ‘corporeal unit’ (see rüpakalàpa). 

(2) Ithas the meaning of ‘group of existence’ (khandha) in kalapasammasana 
(see sammasana), i.e., ‘comprehension by groups’, which is the application of 
‘methodical (or inductive) insight’ (naya-vipassaná) to the comprehension 
of the five aggregates (khandha) as impermanent, painful and non-self. It is 
a process of methodical summarisation, or generalisation, from one’s own 
meditative experience that is applied to each of the five aggregates, viewed 
as past, present, future, as internal and external, etc. In Vism XX, where the 
‘comprehension by groups’ is treated in detail, it is said to constitute ‘the 
beginning of insight’ as it leads to the “knowledge of rise and fall’, being 
the first of the eight insight-knowledges (see visuddhi VI). It is necessary for 
accomplishing the fifth purification (see visuddhi V; Vism XX, 2, 6ff.). 


Source note: This doctrinal term, as well as the doctrine of the 
different corporeal units or groups, such as the suddhatthaka-kaldapa, 
Jivitanavaka-kalàpa, cakkhudasaka-kalàpa,etc.(see Vism XVIIT), belong 
only to the later developments of exegetical literature, such as the 
Visuddhimagga, etc. 


kalpa (Skr): kappa (q.v.). 


kalyana-mitta: ‘noble (or good) friend’, is a senior monk who is the mentor 
and friend of his pupil, “wishing for his welfare and concerned with his 
progress", guiding his meditation; in particular, the meditation teacher 
(kammatthànacariya) is so called. For details see Vism III, 28, 57ff. The 
Buddha said that “noble friendship is the entire holy life" (SN 3:18; 45:2), 
and he himself is the good friend par excellence: “Ananda, it is owing to 
my being a good friend to them that living beings subject to birth are freed 
from birth" (SN 3:18). 


kama may denote: (1) subjective sensuality, ‘sense desire’; (2) objective 
sensuality, the five sense-objects. 


(1) Subjective sensuality, or sense-desire, is directed to all five sense- 
objects, and is synonymous with kamacchanda, ‘sensuous desire’, one of the 
five hindrances (nivarana, q.v.); kama-rága, sensuous lust’, one of the ten 
fetters (samyojana, q.v.); kama-tanhd, ‘sensuous craving’, one of the three 
cravings (tanhd, q.v.); kamavitakka, ‘sensuous thought’, one of the three 
wrong thoughts (micchd-sankappa; see vitakka). Sense-desire is also one of 
the cankers (dsava, q.v.) and clingings (upadana, q.v.). 





KAMESU MICCHACARA | 77 


(2) Objective sensuality is, in the canonical texts, mostly called kama-guna, 
'cords (or strands) of sensuality'. 


“There are five cords of sensuality: the visible objects, cognisable by eye- 
consciousness, that are desirable, cherished, pleasant, lovely, sensuous and 
alluring; the sounds... smells... tastes... bodily impressions cognisable by 
body-consciousness, that are desirable..." (DN 33; MN 13, 26, 59, 66). 


These two kinds of kdma are called 1. kilesa-küma, i.e., küma as a mental 
defilement, 2. vatthu-kama, i.e., kama as the object-base of sensuality; first in 
M.Nid. I, p. 1, and frequently in the commentaries. 


Sense-desire is finally eliminated at the stage of the non-returner (anagamr; 
see ariya-puggala, samyojana). 


The peril and misery of sense-desire is often described in the texts, e.g. in 
stirring similes at MN 22, 54, and in the ‘gradual instruction’ (Gnupubbi- 
katha, q.v.). See further MN 13, 45, 75; Sn v. 766ff.; Dhp 186, 215. 


The texts often stress the fact that what binds man to the world of the 
senses are not the sense organs nor the sense-objects but lustful desire 
(chandaraga). On this see AN 6:63; SN 35:122, 191. 


Source note: Vatthu-kama and kilesa-kama are found for the first time 
in M.Nid. 1. They correspond to the pañca kamaguna (cakkhu-viniieyya 
rūpā, etc.) and kama-rdga in the older Sutta texts (e.g. AN 6:68). 


kama-bhava: ‘sensuous existence’; see bhava. 

kamacchanda: ‘sensuous desire’; see nivarana, chanda. 

kama-guna: see kama. 

kama-loka: ‘sensuous world’; see loka. 

kama-raga: ‘sensuous lust’, is one of the ten fetters (samyojana, q.v.). 
kamasava: see Gsava. 


kama-sukh'allikanuyoga: “being addicted to sensual pleasures’, is one of 
the two extremes to be avoided by the monk; see majjhimà patipada. 


kama-tanha: ‘sensuous craving’; see tanhd. 
kamavacara: ‘sensuous sphere’; see avacara. 


kamesu micchacara: lit. ‘wrong or evil conduct with regard to sensual 
things’; ‘sexual misconduct’ refers to adultery, and to such behaviour with 
minors or other persons under guardianship. The abstaining from such 
unlawful behaviours is one of the five moral rules (see sikkha-pada) binding 
upon all Buddhists. Through any other sexual act one does not become guilty 
of the above transgression, which is considered a great crime. The monk, 
however, has to observe perfect chastity. 


In many Suttas (e.g. AN 10:176) we find the following explanation: “He 
avoids sexual misconduct, abstains from it. He has no intercourse with 





78 | KAMMA 


girls who are still under the protection of father or mother, brother, sister 
or relatives, nor with married women, nor female convicts, nor, lastly, with 
betrothed girls.” 


kamma: (wholesome or unwholesome) action; see karma. 


Source note: Ahosi-, janaka-, garuka-, bahula-, upatthambhaka-, 
upaghdataka-, upapilaka-, marandsanna-, upacchedaka-kamma None 
of these terms is found in the Sutta or Abhidhamma Canon. They 
have been introduced by the commentators (e.g. in Abhidh-s and 
Vism) for the purpose of a systematic grouping of the various aspects 
and functions of karma. The term katattà, however, occurs repeatedly 
in the Abhidhamma Canon in such expressions as: Yasmim samaye... 
kusalassa kammassa katattà... cakkhuvififianam hoti... (Dhs § 431); 
or: Yam atthi rapam kammassa katattá... (Dhs § 653); or katatta ca 
rüpaánam (Patth), etc. 


kamma-bhava: see bhava, paticca-samuppdda. 
kammaja-rüpa: ‘karma-produced corporeality’; see samutthàna. 


kammaififiata: ‘adaptability’, i.e., of corporeality (rüpassa; see khandha, 
Summary J), mental factors (kaya), and of consciousness (citta); see Table II. 


Source note: Not found in this meaning in the oldest parts of the Sutta 
Pitaka; see lahutà. 


kammanta, sammá kammanta: ‘right action’; see magga. 
kamma-paccaya: ‘karma as condition’; see paccaya (13). 
kamma-patha: ‘course of action’, is a term for the group of ten kinds of 
either unwholesome or wholesome actions, viz. 
(1) The tenfold unwholesome courses of action (akusala-kamma-patha): 
- three bodily actions: killing, stealing, sexual misconduct; 
- four verbal actions: lying, slandering, rude speech, foolish babble; 


- three mental actions: covetousness, ill will, evil views. 
Unwholesome mental courses of action comprise only extreme forms of 
defiled thought: the greedy wish to appropriate others' property, the hateful 


thought of harming others, and pernicious views. Milder forms of mental 
defilement are also unwholesome, but do not constitute ‘courses of action’. 


(2) The tenfold wholesome course of action (kusalakamma-patha): 
- three bodily actions: avoidance ofkilling, stealing, sexual misconduct; 


- four verbal actions: avoidance of lying, slandering, rude speech, 
foolish babble; i.e., true, conciliatory, mild, and wise speech; 


- three mental actions: unselfishness, good-will, right views. 
Both lists occur repeatedly, e.g. in AN 10:28, 176; MN 9; they are 


explained in detail in MN 114, and in Com to MN 9 (The Discourse on 
Right View, by Bhikkhu Nanamoli, Wheel 377—379.), AsTr, 126ff. 


KAPPA | 79 





kamma-samutthana-rüpa: ‘corporeality produced through karma’; see 
samutthana. 


kammatthana: lit. *vorking-ground' (i.e., for meditation), is the term in the 
Commentaries for ‘subjects of meditation’; see bhāvanā. 


Source note: This term, as a designation for the meditation exercises 
(bhàvaná), is found only in the Commentaries. In the Suttas the word 
is only used in a concrete sense for ‘field of activity or occupation’, as 
agriculture, trade, etc. 


kamma-vatta: ‘karma-round’; see vatta. 
kammayuhana: see ayühana. 


kamupadana: ‘sensuous clinging’, is one of the four kinds of clinging 
(upadana, q.v.). 


kankha: ‘doubt’; either an intellectual, critical doubt or an ethically and 
psychologically detrimental doubt. The latter may either be a persistent 
negative scepticism or wavering indecision. Only the detrimental doubt 
(identical with vicikicchá, q.v.) is to be rejected as karmically unwholesome, 
as it paralyses thinking and hinders the inner development of man. Reasoned, 
critical doubt in dubious matters is thereby not discouraged. 


The sixteen doubts enumerated in the Suttas (e.g. MN 2) are the following: 
“Have I been in the past? Or, have I not been in the past? What have I been in 
the past? How have I been in the past? From what state into what state did 
Ichange in the past? Shall I be in the future? Or, shall I not be in the future? 
What shall I be in the future? How shall I be in the future? From what state 
into what state shall I change in the future? Am I? Or, am I not? What am I? 
How am I? Whence has this being come? Whither will it go?" 


kankha-vitarana-visuddhi: ‘purification by overcoming doubt’, is the 
fourth of the seven stages of purification (visuddhi, q.v.). 


kappa (Skr kalpa): ‘world-period’, an inconceivably long period of time, 
an aeon. This again is subdivided into four sections: world-dissolution 
(samvattakappa), continuation of the chaos (samvatta-tthayi), world- 
formation (vivatta-kappa), continuation of the formed world (vivattatthayi). 


“How long a world-dissolution will continue, how long the chaos, how long 
the formation, how long the continuation of the formed world, of these 
things, O monks, one hardly can say that it will be so many years, or so 
many centuries, or so many millennia, or so many hundred thousands of 
years” (AN 4:156). A detailed description of the four world-periods is given 
in that stirring discourse on the all-embracing impermanence in AN 7:62. 


The beautiful simile in SN 15:5 may be mentioned here: “Suppose, O monks, 
there was a huge rock of one solid mass, one mile long, one mile wide, one 
mile high, without split or flaw. And at the end of every hundred years a 
man should come and rub against it once with a silken cloth. Then that 
huge rock would wear off and disappear quicker than a world-period. But 





80 | KARMA 


of such world-periods, O monks, many have passed away, many hundreds, 
many thousands, many hundred thousands. And how is this possible? 
Inconceivable, O monks, is this samsaára (q.v.), not to be discovered is any 
first beginning of beings who, obstructed by ignorance and ensnared by 
craving, are hurrying and hastening through this round of rebirths.” 


Compare here Grimm's German fairy tale of the little shepherd boy: ‘In 
Farther Pomerania there is the diamond-mountain, one hour high, one hour 
wide, one hour deep. There every hundred years a little bird comes and 
whets its little beak on it. And when the whole mountain is ground off, then 
the first second of eternity has passed." 


karma (Skr), Pali: kamma: 'action',correctly speaking denotes the wholesome 
and unwholesome volitions (kusala- and akusala-cetand) and their 
concomitant mental factors, causing rebirth and shaping the destiny 
of beings. These karmic volitions (kamma cetand) become manifest as 
wholesome or unwholesome actions by body (kaya-kamma), speech 
(vacikamma) and mind (mano-kamma). Thus the Buddhist term ‘karma by no 
means signifies the result of actions, and quite certainly not the fate of man, 
or perhaps even of whole nations (the so-called wholesale or mass-karma), 
misconceptions which, through the influence of theosophy, have become 
widely spread in the West. 


“Volition (cetana), O monks, is what I call action (cetanaham bhikkhave 
kammam vadami), for through volition one performs the action by body, 
speech, or mind... There is karma (action), O monks, that ripens in hell... 
karma that ripens in the animal world... karma that ripens in the world of 
men... karma that ripens in the heavenly world... Threefold, however, is 
the fruit of karma: ripening during the lifetime (dittha-dhamma-vedaniya- 
kamma), ripening in the next birth (upapajja-vedaniya-kamma), ripening in 
later births (aparüpariya-vedantya kamma)...” (AN 6:63). 

The three conditions or roots (müla, q.v.) of unwholesome karma (actions) 
are greed, hatred, delusion (lobha, dosa, moha); those of wholesome 
karma are unselfishness (alobha), hatelessness (adosa = mettā, good-will), 
undeludedness (amoha = paññā, knowledge). 


"Greed, O monks, is a condition for the arising of karma; hatred is a condition 
for the arising of karma; delusion is a condition for the arising of karma..." 
(AN 3:109). 


“The unwholesome actions are of three kinds, conditioned by greed, or hate, 
or delusion. 


"Killing... stealing... sexual misconduct... lying... slandering... rude 
speech... foolish babble, if practised, carried on, and frequently cultivated, 
leads to rebirth in hell, or amongst the animals, or amongst the ghosts" (AN 
3:40). *He who kills and is cruel goes either to hell or, if reborn as man, will be 
short-lived. He who torments others will be afflicted with disease. The angry 
one will look ugly, the envious one will be without influence, the stingy one 
will be poor, the stubborn one will be of low descent, the indolent one will 





KARMA | 81 


be without knowledge. In the contrary case, man will be reborn in heaven or 
reborn as man, he will be long-lived, possessed of beauty, influence, noble 
descent and knowledge” (See MN 135). 


For the above tenfold wholesome and unwholesome course of action, 
see kamma-patha. For the five heinous crimes with immediate result, 
see Gnantarika-kamma. 


“Owners of their karma are the beings, heirs of their karma, their karma is 
their womb from which they are born, their karma is their friend, their refuge. 
Whatever karma they perform, good or bad, thereof they will be the heirs” 
(MN 135). 


With regard to the time of the taking place of the karma result (vipdaka), one 
distinguishes, as mentioned above, three kinds of karma: 


(1) karma ripening during the lifetime (dittha-dhamma-vedaniya-kamma); 
(2) karma ripening in the next birth (upapajja-vedaniya-kamma); 


(3) karma ripening in later births (apardpariya-vedaniya-kamma). 

The first two kinds of karma may be without karma result (vipdka), if the 
circumstances required for the taking place of the karma result are missing, 
or if, through the preponderance of counteractive karma and their being 
too weak, they are unable to produce any result. In this case they are called 
ahosi-kamma, lit. ‘karma that has been’, in other words, ineffectual karma. 

The third type of karma, however, which bears fruit in later lives, will, 
whenever and wherever there is an opportunity, be productive of karma 
result. Before its result has ripened, it will never become ineffective as long 
as the life-process is kept going by craving and ignorance. 

According to the Commentaries, e.g. Vism XIX, the first of the seven karmic 
impulsive-moments (kamma javana; see javana) is considered as ‘karma 
ripening during the lifetime’, the seventh moment as ‘karma ripening in the 
next birth’, the remaining five moments as ‘karma ripening in later births’. 

With regard to their functions one distinguishes types of kamma: 


(1) Regenerative (or productive) karma (janaka-kamma) produces the five 
groups of existence (corporeality, feeling, perception, mental formations, 
consciousness) at rebirth as well as during life-continuity. 


(2) Supportive (or consolidating) karma (upatthambhaka-kamma) does not 
produce karma results but is only able to maintain the already produced 
karma results. 


(3) Counteractive (suppressive or frustrating) karma (upapilaka-kamma) 
counteracts or suppresses the karma results. 


(4) Destructive (or supplanting) karma (upaghátaka-or upacchedaka- 
kamma) destroys the influence of a weaker karma and effects only its own 
result. 


With regard to the priority of their result one distinguishes: 
(1) weighty karma (garuka-kamma), 





82 | KARMA-ACCUMULATION 


(2) habitual karma (acinnaka- or bahula-kamma), 

(3) death-proximate karma (marandsanna-kamma), 

(4) stored-up karma (katatta-kamma). 
(1,2) The weighty (garuka) and the habitual (bahula) wholesome or unwhole- 
some karma are ripening earlier than the light and rarely performed karma. 
(3) The death-proximate (maranásanna) karma — i.e., the wholesome or 
unwholesome volition present immediately before death, which often may 
be the reflex of some previously performed good or evil action (kamma), or of 
a sign of it (kamma-nimitta), or of a sign of the future existence (gati-nimitta) 
— produces rebirth. (4) In the absence of any of these three actions at the 
moment before death, the stored-up (katatta) karma will produce rebirth. 
A real, and in the ultimate sense true, understanding of Buddhist karma 
doctrine is possible only through a deep insight into the impersonality 
(see anattà) and conditionality (see paticca-samuppdda, paccaya) of all 
phenomena of existence. “Everywhere, in all the forms of existence... such 
a one is beholding merely mental and physical phenomena kept going by 
their being bound up through causes and effects. 
“No doer does he see behind the deeds, no recipient apart from the karma- 
fruit. And with full insight he clearly understands that the wise ones are 
using merely conventional terms when, with regard to the taking place of 
any action, they speak of a doer, or when they speak of a receiver of the 
karma results at their arising. Therefore the ancient masters have said: 


“No doer of the deeds is found, 

No one who ever reaps their fruits; 
Empty phenomena roll on: 

This view alone is right and true. 


And while the deeds and their results 

Roll on, based on conditions all, 

There no beginning can be seen, 

Just as it is with seed and tree.” (Vism XIX, 20) 


Karma (kamma-paccaya) is one of the twenty-four conditions (paccaya, q.v.); 
see kamma, Source note. 


Literature: Karma and Rebirth, by Nyanatiloka (Wheel 9); Survival and 
Karma in Buddhist Perspective, by K.N. Jayatilleke (Wheel 141/143); 
Kamma and its Fruit (Wheel 221/224). 


karma-accumulation: áyühana (q.v.). 


karma-formations: sankhdra, i.e., wholesome or unwholesome volitions 
(cetand) manifested as actions of body, speech or mind, form the second link 
of the formula of dependent origination (paticca-samuppdda, q.v.). 


karma-process: see bhava, paticca-samuppdda. 


karma-produced corporeality: see samutthana. 





KAYA | 83 


karma result: vipdka (q.v.). 
karma-round: kamma-vatta (see vatta). 
karmically acquired corporeality: upaádinnarüpa (q.v.). 


karmically wholesome, unwholesome, neutral: kusala (q.v.), akusala (q.v.), 
avyákata (q.v.); see Table I. 


karuna: ‘compassion’, is one of the four sublime abodes (brahma-vihara, q.v.). 


kasina: (perhaps related to Skr krtsna, ‘all, complete, whole’), is the name 
for a purely external device to produce and develop concentration of mind 
and attain the four absorptions (jhdna q.v.). It consists in concentrating one’s 
full and undivided attention on one visible object as preparatory image 
(parikamma-nimitta), e.g. a coloured spot or disc, or a piece of earth, or a 
pond at some distance, etc., until at last one perceives, even with the eyes 
closed, a mental reflex, the acquired image (uggaha-nimitta). Now, while 
continuing to direct one’s attention to this image, there may arise the spotless 
and immovable counter-image (patibhdga-nimitta), and together with it the 
neighbourhood-concentration (upacdra-samddhi) will have been reached. 
While still persevering in the concentration on the object, one finally will 
reach a state of mind where all sense-activity is suspended, where there is 
no more seeing and hearing, no more perception of bodily impression and 
feeling, i.e., the state of the first mental absorption (jhàna, q.v.). 


The ten kasinas mentioned in the Suttas are: earth-kasina, water, fire, 
wind, blue, yellow, red, white, space, and consciousness. "There are ten 
kasina-spheres: someone sees the earth-kasina, above, below, on all sides, 
undivided, unbounded... someone see the water-kasina, above, below, etc." 
(MN 77; DN 33) See abhibhayatana, bhavana; further see Fund Ch. IV. 


For space and consciousness-kasina we find in Vism V the names limited 
space-kasina (paricchinnakasa-kasina) and light-kasina (aloka-kasina). 


For full description see Vism IV—V; also AsTr, 248. 
katatta-kamma: ‘stored-up karma; see karma. 


Source note: Not found in the oldest parts of the Sutta Pitaka; 
see kamma. 


kaya (lit: accumulation): ‘group’, ‘body’, may either refer to the physical 
body (rüpa-káya) or to the mental body (nàma-kaya). In the latter case it is 
either a collective name for the mental groups (feeling, perception, mental 
formations, consciousness; see khandha), or merely for feeling, perception 
and a few of the mental formations (see nama), e.g. in kaya-lahutà, etc. 
(See Table II). Kaya has this same meaning in the standard description 
of the third absorption (jhdna, q.v.) “and he feels joy in his mind or his 
mental constitution (kaya)", and (e.g. Pug 1—8) of the attainment of the eight 
deliverances (vimokkha, q.v.); “having attained the eight deliverances in his 
mind, or his person (kaya)." Kaya is also the fifth sense organ, the body- 
organ; see ayatana, dhatu, indriya. 





84 | KAYA-GATA-SATI 


kaya-gata-sati: ‘mindfulness with regard to the body’, refers sometimes 
(e.g. Vism VIII, 2) only to the contemplation on the thirty-two parts of the 
body, sometimes (e.g. MN 119) to all the various meditations comprised 
under the ‘contemplation of the body’ (kayanupassaná), the first of the 
four ‘foundations of mindfulness’ (satipatthana, q.v.), consisting partly in 
concentration (samādhi) exercises, partly in insight (vipassana) exercises. 
On the other hand, the cemetery meditations (sivathika, q.v.) mentioned 
in the Satipatthana Sutta (MN 10) are nearly the same as the ten contem- 
plations of loathsomeness (asubha-bhavand, q.v.) of Vism VI, whereas 
elsewhere the contemplation on the thirty-two parts of the body is called 
the ‘reflection on impurity’ (patikküla-safifia). 

In such texts as: ‘One thing, O monks, developed and repeatedly practised, 
leads to the attainment of wisdom. It is the contemplation on the body’ (AN 
1); the reference is to all exercises mentioned in the first satipatthàna. 


Vism VIII, 2 gives a detailed description and explanation of the method 
of developing the contemplation on the thirty-two parts of the body. This 
exercise can produce the first absorption only (jhana, q.v.). The text given 
in the Satipatthana Sutta and elsewhere— but leaving out the brain— runs 
as follows: “And further, O monks, the monk contemplates this body from 
the soles of the feet upward, and from the tops of the hairs downward, with 
skin stretched over it, and filled with manifold impurities: ‘This body has 
hairs of the head, hairs of the body, nails, teeth, skin, flesh, sinews, bones, 
marrow, kidneys, heart, liver, diaphragm, spleen, lungs, intestines, bowels, 
stomach, excrement, bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, fat, tears, skin grease, 
spittle, nasal mucus, oil of the joints, and urine...” 


Vism VIII, 2 says “By repeating the words of this exercise one will become 
well acquainted with the wording, the mind will not rush here and there, 
the different parts will become distinct and appear like a row of fingers, or 
a row of hedge-poles. Now, just as one repeats the exercise in words, one 
should do it also in mind. The repeating in mind forms the condition for the 
penetration of the characteristic marks... He who thus has examined the 
parts of the body as to colour, shape, region, locality and limits, and considers 
them one by one, and not too hurriedly, as something loathsome, to such a 
one, while contemplating the body, all these things at the same time are 
appearing distinctly clear. But also when keeping one’s attention fixed 
outwardly (i.e., to the bodies of other beings), and when all the parts appear 
distinctly, then all men and animals moving about lose the appearance of 
living beings and appear like heaps of many different things. And it looks as 
if those foods and drinks, being swallowed by them, were being inserted into 
this heap of things. Now, while again and again one is conceiving the idea 
‘Disgusting! Disgusting! — omitting in due course several parts — gradually 
the attainment-concentration (appand-samdadhi, i.e., the concentration of the 
jhana) will be reached. In this connection, the appearing of forms... is called 
the acquired image (uggaha-nimitta), the arising of loathsomeness, however, 
the counter-image (patibhaga-nimitta)." 


kaya-kamma: ‘bodily action’; see karma, kamma-patha. 





KHANDHA | 85 


kaya-kammafifiata: kaya-kammaiifiata-lahutà, kaya-kammaniiata-muduta, 
kaya-kammaniiatd-paguinata, kaya-kammafifiata-passaddhi, kaya-kamma 
fifiatà-ujukatá; see Table II. For kaya-kammafifiatà-passaddhi, see further 
bojjhanga. 


kaya-lahuta: ‘agility or lightness of mental factors’ (see lahuta). 


Source note: Not found in the oldest parts of the Sutta Pitaka; for this 
and the factors of kaya-mudutà, -kammafifiatà, -pagufifiata, -ujukata, 
see lahutà. 


kayanupassana: ‘contemplation of the body’, is one of the four foundations of 
mindfulness; see satipatthàna. 


kaya-passaddhi: ‘serenity or quietude of the sense’ (PED); see bojjhanga. 


kaya-sakkhi: ‘body-witness’, is one of the seven noble disciples (see ariya- 
puggala, B.). He is one who “in his own person (lit. body) has attained 
the eight deliverances (vimokkha, q.v.), and after wisely understanding the 
phenomena, the cankers have partly come to extinction” (Pug 32). In AN 
9:44 it is said: “A monk, O brother, attains the first absorption (jhdna, q.v.), 
and as far as this domain reaches, so far he has realised it in his own person. 
Thus the Blessed One calls such a person a body-witness in certain respects. 
(The same is then repeated with regard to the seven higher absorptions.) 
Further again, O brother, the monk attains the extinction of perception 
and feeling (see nirodha-samapatti), and after wisely understanding the 
phenomena, all the cankers come to extinction. Thus, O brother, the Blessed 
One calls such a person a body-witness in all respects." 


kaya-vififiatti: see vifinatti. 
khalu-paccha-bhattik'anga: see dhutariga. 


khana: ‘moment’; see cittakkhana. 


Source note: The three phases in a moment of consciousness, i.e., 
uppáda, thiti, bhanga, are probably mentioned for the first time in the 
commentaries; but there is a close parallel in two Sutta texts which may 
have been the source for that teaching of a three-phased moment of 
consciousness: “There are three characteristics of what is conditioned 
(sankhatassa lakkhand): an arising (uppddo) is apparent, a passing away 
(vayo) is apparent, a change in the existing (thitassa afifiathattam: Com = 
ageing) is apparent” (AN 3:47). The same three phases are mentioned in 
SN 22:37, where they are applied to each of the five khandha. 


khandha: the five ‘groups (of existence)’ or ‘groups of clinging’ 
(upadanakkhandha); alternative renderings: aggregates, categories of 
clinging’s objects. These are the five aspects in which the Buddha has 
summed up all the physical and mental phenomena of existence, and which 
appear to the ignorant man as his ego, or personality, to wit: 


(1) the corporeality group (riipa-kkhandha), 
(2) the feeling group (vedana-kkhandha), 





86 | KHANDHA 


(3) the perception group (safifia-kkhandha), 
(4) the mental-formation group (sarkháüra-kkhandha), 
(5) the consciousness-group (viifiana-kkhandha). 


"Whatever there exists of corporeal things, whether past, present or 
future, one's own or external, gross or subtle, lofty or low, far or near, all 
that belongs to the corporeality group. Whatever there exists of feeling... 
of perception... of mental formations... of consciousness... all that 
belongs to the consciousness-group" (SN 22:48). Another division is that 
into the two groups: mind (2—5) and corporeality (1) (nàma-rüpa), while in 
Dhammasangant, the first book of the Abhidhamma, all the phenomena 
are treated by way of three groups: consciousness (5), mental factors (2-4), 
corporeality (1), in Pali citta, cetasika, rüpa. See Guide Ch. I. 


What is called individual existence is in reality nothing but a mere process 
of those mental and physical phenomena, a process that since time 
immemorial has been going on, and that also after death will still continue 
for unthinkably long periods of time. These five groups, however, neither 
singly nor collectively constitute any self-dependent real ego-entity, or 
personality (atta), nor is there to be found any such entity apart from them. 
Hence the belief in such an ego-entity or personality, as real in the ultimate 
sense, proves a mere illusion. 


“When all constituent parts are there, 

The designation ‘cart’ is used; 

Just so, where the five groups exist, 

Of ‘living being’ do we speak." (SN 5:10). 


The fact ought to be emphasised here that these five groups, correctly 
speaking, merely form an abstract classification by the Buddha, but that 
they as such, i.e., as just these five complete groups, have no real existence, 
since only single representatives of these groups, mostly variable, can arise 
with any state of consciousness. For example, with one and the same unit 
of consciousness only one single kind of feeling, say joy or sorrow, can be 
associated and never more than one. Similarly, two different perceptions 
cannot arise at the same moment. Also, of the various kinds of sense- 
cognition or consciousness, only one can be present at a time, for example, 
seeing, hearing or inner consciousness, etc. Of the fifty mental formations, 
however, a smaller or larger number are always associated with every state 
of consciousness, as we shall see later on. 


Some writers on Buddhism who have not understood that the five khandha 
are just classificatory groupings, have conceived them as compact entities 
(‘heaps’, ‘bundles’), while actually, as stated above, the groups never exist 
as such, i.e., they never occur in a simultaneous totality of all their con- 
stituents. Also those single constituents of a group which are present in any 
given body-and-mind process are of an evanescent nature, and so also their 
varying combinations. Feeling, perception and mental formations are only 
different aspects and functions of a single unit of consciousness. They are 
to consciousness what redness, softness, sweetness, etc. are to an apple and 
have as little separate existence as those qualities. 





KHANDHA | 87 


In SN 22:56, there is the following short definition of these five groups: 


“What, O monks, is the corporeality-group? The four primary elements 
(maha-bhüta or dhatu) and corporeality depending thereon, this is called the 
corporeality-group. 

“What, O monks, is the feeling-group? There are six classes of feeling: due 
to visual impression, to sound impression, to odour impression, to taste 
impression, to bodily impression, and to mind impression... 


“What, O monks, is the perception-group? There are six classes of perception: 
perception of visual objects, of sounds, of odours, of tastes, of bodily 
impressions, and of mental impressions... 


“What, O monks, is the group of mental formations? There are six classes of 
volitional states (cetand): with regard to visual objects, to sounds, to odours, 
to tastes, to bodily impressions and to mind objects... 


“What, O monks, is the consciousness-group? There are six classes of 
consciousness: eye-consciousness, ear-consciousness, nose-consciousness, 
tongue-consciousness, body-consciousness, and  mind-consciousness." 
About the inseparability of the groups it is said: 


“Whatever, O brother, there exists of feeling, of perception and of mental 
formations, these things are associated, not dissociated, and it is impossible 
to separate one from the other and show their difference. For whatever one 
feels, one perceives; and whatever one perceives, of this one is conscious" 
(MN 43). 


Further: "Impossible is it for anyone to explain the passing out of one 
existence and the entering into a new existence, or the growth, increase 
and development of consciousness independent of corporeality, feeling, 
perception and mental formations" (SN 12:53). 


For the inseparability and mutual conditionality of the four mental groups 
see paccaya (6, 7). 


Regarding the impersonality (anatta) and emptiness (sufifiata) of the five 
groups, it is said in SN 22:49: 

"Whatever there is of corporeality, feeling, perception, mental formations 
and consciousness, whether past, present or future, one's own or external, 
gross or subtle, lofty or low, far or near, this one should understand 
according to reality and true wisdom: ‘This does not belong to me, this 
am I not, this is not my Ego." Further in SN 22:95: "Suppose that a 
man who is not blind were to behold the many bubbles on the Ganges as 
they are driving along; and he should watch them and carefully examine 
them. After carefully examining them, however, they will appear to him 
empty, unreal and unsubstantial. In exactly the same way does the monk 
behold all the corporeal phenomena... feelings... perceptions... mental 
formations... states of consciousness, whether they be of the past, present 
or future... far or near. And he watches them and examines them carefully; 
and after carefully examining them, they appear to him empty, unreal and 
unsubstantial.” 





88 | KHANDHA 


The five groups are compared, respectively, to a lump of froth, a bubble, a 
mirage, a coreless plantain stem, and a conjuring trick (SN 22:95). See the 
Khandha Samyutta (SN 22); Vism XIV, 224. 


SUMMARY OF THE FIVE GROUPS 
I. Corporeality Group (rüpakkhandha) 


A. Underived (no-upada): four elements 


the solid, or earth-element (pathavi-dhàtu) 
the liquid, or water-element (apo-dhàtu) 
heat, or fire-element (tejo-dhatu) 
motion, or wind-element (vayo-dhatu) 


B. Derived (updda): twenty-four secondary phenomena 


Physical sense organs of: seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, body 
Physical sense-objects: form, sound, odour, taste, (bodily impacts) 


‘Bodily impacts’ (photthabba) are generally omitted in this list, because these 
physical objects of body-sensitivity are identical with the aforementioned 
solid element, heat and motion element. Hence their inclusion under 
‘derived corporeality’ would be a duplication. 


femininity (itthindriya) 

virility (purisindriya) 

physical base of mind (hadaya-vatthu, q.v.) 
bodily expression (kaya-vififiatti; see vififiatti) 
verbal expression (vaci-vififiatti) 

physical life (rüpa-jivita; see jivita) 
space element (akasa-dhátu, q.v.) 
physical agility (rüpassa lahutà) 

physical elasticity (rüpassa mudutà) 

physical adaptability (rüpassa kammajniiata) 
physical growth (rüpassa upacaya) 
physical continuity (rüpassa santati; see santana) 
decay (jara, q.v.) 

impermanence (aniccatà) 

nutriment (ahara, q.v.) 


II. Feeling Group (vedana-kkhandha) 


All feelings may, according to their nature, be classified as five kinds: 


bodily agreeable feeling: sukha = kayika sukhà vedana 

bodily painful feeling: dukkha = kāyikā dukkha vedana 
mentally agreeable feeling: somanassa = cetasikà sukha vedana 
mentally painful feeling: domanassa = cetasikà dukkhà vedana 
indifferent feeling: upekkha = adukkha-m-asukha vedana 


III. Perception Group (sarifia-kkhandha) 


All perceptions are divided into six classes: perception of form, sound, odour, 
taste, bodily impression, and mental impression. 





KILESA | 89 


IV. Group of Mental Formations (sarnkhara-kkhandha) 


This group comprises fifty mental phenomena, of which eleven are general 
psychological elements, twenty-five lofty (sobhana) qualities, fourteen 
karmically unwholesome qualities. See Table II. 


V. Consciousness Group (vififiana-kkhandha) 


The Suttas divide consciousness, according to the senses, into six classes: 
eye-, ear-, nose-, tongue-, body-, mind-consciousness. 


The Abhidhamma and commentaries, however, distinguish, from the karmic 
or moral viewpoint, eighty-nine classes of consciousness. See vififidna 
and Table I. The moral quality of feeling, perception and consciousness is 
determined by the mental formations. 


khandha-parinibbana: see Nibbana. 
khandha-santana: see santdna. 
khanti: ‘patience’, ‘forbearance’, is one of the ten perfections (pdrami, q.v.). 


khayanupassana: ‘contemplation of dissolution’, is one of the eighteen chief 
kinds of insight (see vipassana). 


Khidda-padosika deva: ‘the celestial beings corruptible by pleasures’, are 
a class of devas (q.v.) of the sensuous sphere. They waste their time in 
merriment, play and enjoyment, and thereby become thoughtless, and in 
their thoughtlessness they fall from that world (DN 1, 24). 


khinasava: ‘the one in whom all cankers are destroyed’ is a term for the 
arahat, or holy one; see dsava. 


kicca: ‘function’. Regarding the fourteen functions of consciousness, 
see vififiana-kicca. 


kilesa: ‘defilements, are  mind-defiling, unwholesome qualities. 
Vism XXII, 49, 65: “There are ten defilements, thus called because 
they are themselves defiled, and because they defile the mental factors 
associated with them. They are: (1) greed (lobha), (2) hate (dosa), (3) 
delusion (moha), (4) conceit (màna), (5) speculative views (ditthi), (6) 
sceptical doubt (vicikiccha), (7) mental torpor (thina), (8) restlessness 
(uddhacca); (9) shamelessness (ahirika), (10) lack of moral dread or 
unconscientiousness (anottappa)." For 1—3, see müla; 4, see māna; 5, 
see ditthi; 6—8, see nivarana; 9 and 10, see ahirika-anottappa. 


The ten are explained in Dhs 88 1229-1239 and enumerated in Vibh XII. 
No classification of the kilesa is found in the Suttas, though the term 
occurs quite often in them. For the related term, upakkilesa (q.v.) 
‘impurities’, different lists are given. 


Source note: The ten kilesa are probably for the first time enumerated 
and explained in Dhs. There they are, however, called kilesa-vatthu, 
which name (dasa-kilesa-vatthu) is already mentioned in Patis I, 130, 
though there they are neither enumerated nor explained. 





90 | KILESA-KAMA 


kilesa-kama: ‘sensuality considered as defilement’ (see kilesa) might well 
be called ‘subjective sensuality’, in contradistinction to ‘objective sensuality’ 
(vatthu-kama), i.e., the sensuous objects (kama-guna). See kama. 


kilesa-parinibbana: see Nibbana (1). 
killing: see karma, kamma-patha, sikkha-pada. 


kificana: ‘something’, i.e., something evil that sticks or adheres to character. 
‘Evil appendant, is a term for the three unwholesome roots (mila). 
"There are three appendants: greed (lobha) is an appendant, hate (dosa) 
is an appendant, delusion (moha) is an appendant" (DN 33). ‘Freed from 
appendants’ (akificana) is a term for the perfectly holy one (arahat). 


kiriya- (or kriya-) citta: ‘functional consciousness or ‘karmically 
inoperative consciousness’, is a term for such states of consciousness as are 
neither karmically wholesome (kusala), nor unwholesome (akusala), nor 
karma results (vipdka); that is, they function independently of karma. Thus are 
also called all those worldly mental states in the arahat which are accompanied 
by two or three noble roots (greedlessness, hatelessness, undeludedness), 
being in the arahat karmically neutral and corresponding to the karmically 
wholesome states of a non-arahat (See Table I, 1-8 and 73—89.), as well as the 
rootless mirth-producing (hasituppdda) mind-consciousness-element of the 
arahat (Table I, 72); further, that mind-element (mano-dhátu) which performs 
the function of advertence (Gvajjana) to the sense object (Table I, 70), and 
that mind-consciousness-element (manovififiána-dhütu) which performs the 
functions of deciding (votthapana) and advertence to the mental object (Table 
I, 71). The last-named two elements, of course, occur in all beings. 

Together with karma resultant consciousness (vipdka) it belongs to the 
group of ‘karmically neutral consciousness’ (avyákata). See Table I (last 
column). 


Source note: This is a term first used in the Abhidhamma Canon 
(e.g. Dhs $88 566—582). It has an important place in post-canonical 
Abhidhamma literature, e.g. Vism XIV. 


kolankola: ‘passing from one noble family to another’, is the name for one of 
the three kinds of sotapanna (q.v.). 


kriya-citta: kiriya (q.v.). 


kukkucca.:lit.*wrongly-performed-ness' (ku+krta+ya),i.e.,scruples,remorse, 
uneasiness of conscience, worry, is one of the karmically unwholesome 
(akusala) mental faculties (Table II) which, whenever it arises, is associated 
with hateful (discontented) consciousness (Tables I and III, 30, 31). It is the 
“repentance over wrong things done, and right things neglected’ (Com to AN 
1). Restlessness and scruples (uddhacca-kukkucca), combined, are counted as 
one of the five mental hindrances (nivarana, q.v.). 


kuppa-dhamma: ‘liable to perturbation’, is one who has not yet attained full 





KUSALA-VIPAKA | 91 


mastery over the absorptions. In Pug 3 it is said: “What person is liable to 
perturbation? Such a person gains the attainments of the fine-material and 
immaterial sphere (see avacara). But he does not gain them at his wish, nor 
without toil and exertion; and not at his wish as regards place, object and 
duration, does he enter them or arise from them. Thus it is well possible that 
in case of such a person, through negligence, the attainments will become 
perturbed. This person is liable to perturbation.” 


kusala: 'karmically wholesome’ or ‘profitable’, salutary, morally good, 
(skilful). Connotations of the term, according to As, are: of good health, 
blameless, productive of favourable karma result, skilful. It should be noted 
that the Commentaries exclude the meaning ‘skilful’, when the term is 
applied to states of consciousness. 


It is defined in MN 9 as the ten wholesome courses of action (see kamma- 
patha). In psychological terms, 'karmically wholesome’ are all those 
karmic volitions (kamma-cetand) and the consciousness and mental factors 
associated therewith, which are accompanied by two or three wholesome 
roots (see müla), i.e., by greedlessness (alobha) and hatelessness (adosa), 
and in some cases also by non-delusion (amoha: wisdom, understanding). 
Such states of consciousness are regarded as *karmically wholesome’ as 
they are causes of favourable karma results and contain the seeds of a happy 
destiny or rebirth. From this explanation, two facts should be noted: (1) it 
is volition that makes a state of consciousness, or an act, ‘good’ or ‘bad’; 
(2) the moral criterion in Buddhism is the presence or absence of the three 
wholesome or moral roots (see müla). 


The above explanations refer to mundane (lokiya, q.v.) wholesome 
consciousness. Supermundane wholesome (lokuttara-kusala) states, i.e., 
the four paths of sanctity (see ariya-puggala), have as results only the 
corresponding four fruitions; they do not constitute karma, nor do they lead 
to rebirth, and this applies also to the good actions of an arahat (Table I, 
73-80) and his meditative states (Table I, 81—89), which are all karmically 
inoperative (functional; see kiriya). 


Kusala belongs to a threefold division of all consciousness, as found in 
the Abhidhamma (Dhs), into wholesome (kusala), unwholesome (akusala) 
and karmically neutral (avyákata), which is the first of the triads (tika) in the 
Abhidhamma schedule (mdtika); see Guide Ch. I A; Vism XIV, 83ff. 


kusala-kamma-patha: *wholesome course of action'; see kamma-patha. 


kusala-müla: the ‘wholesome roots’ or ‘roots of wholesome action’, are 
greedlessness (alobha), hatelessness (adosa), and non-delusion (amoha; 
see miila). They are identical with kusala-hetu (see paccaya, 1). 


kusala-vipaka: the (mental) ‘karma result of wholesome karma’ (see karma). 





92 | LAHUTA 


L 


lahuta: ‘lightness’, or ‘agility’, may be of three kinds: of corporeality (rüpassa 
lahuta; see khandha, I), of mental factors (kaya-lahutà), and of consciousness 
(citta-lahutà). See Table II. 


Source note: the terms rüpassa-, kdya-, or citta- are for the 
first time found in the Abhidhamma Canon, especially in the 
Dhammasangant. All, with the sole exception of pāguññatā, are 
implied in the Sutta Canon, e.g. citte mudu-bhüte kammaniye (MN 4); 
lahu-safifiaíi ca kaye okkamitvà (SN 51:22); cittam ujukam akamsu 
(SN 1:26; PTS). Kàya-passaddhi and citta-passaddhi, however, are 
well known in the old Sutta texts in this connection. 


lakkhana: ‘characteristics’. For the three lakkhana of existence, see ti- 
lakkhana. 


law: dhamma (q.v.). 

learning, wisdom based on: see paññā. 

liberality: dana (q.v.), caga (q.v.). 

liberation: see vimokkha. 

life-infatuation: see mada. 

light, perception of: see Gloka-saniiid. 

light-kasina: see kasina. 

lightness (of corporeality, mental factors and consciousness): /ahutá (q.v.). 
loathsomeness (of the body): see asubha, sivathikà, kayagatàsati. 


lobha: ‘greed’, is one of the three unwholesome roots (müla, q.v.) and a 
synonym of raga (q.v.) and tanhá (q.v.). 


lobha-carita: ‘greedy-natured’; see carita. 
lofty consciousness: see sobhana. 
lohita-kasina: 'red-kasina'; see kasina. 


loka: *world', denotes the three spheres of existence comprising the whole 
universe, i.e.: (1) the sensuous world (kama-loka), or the world of the five 
senses; (2) the fine-material world (rüpa-loka), corresponding to the four 
fine-material absorptions (see jhdna 1—4); (3) the immaterial world (arüpa- 
loka), corresponding to the four immaterial absorptions (see jhdna, 5-8). 


The sensuous world comprises the hells (niraya), the animal kingdom 
(tiracchàna-yoni), the ghost-realm (peta-loka), the demon world (asura- 





LUST | 93 


nikàya), the human world (manussa-loka) and the six lower celestial worlds 
(see deva I). In the fine-material world (see deva II) still exist the faculties 
of seeing and hearing, which, together with the other sense faculties, are 
temporarily suspended in the four absorptions. In the immaterial world (see 
deva III) there is no corporeality whatsoever, only the four mental groups 
(see khandha) exist there. 


Though the term /oka is not applied in the Suttas to those three worlds, 
but only the term bhava, ‘existence’ (e.g. MN 43), there is no doubt that the 
teaching about the three worlds belongs to the earliest, i.e., Sutta-period, of 
the Buddhist scriptures, as many relevant passages show. 


loka-dhamma: ‘worldly conditions’. “Eight things are called worldly 
conditions, since they arise in connection with worldly life, namely: gain and 
loss, honour and dishonour, happiness and misery, praise and blame” (Vism 
22). See also AN 8:5. 


lokiya: ‘mundane’, are all those states of consciousness and mental factors 
— arising in the worldling, as well as in the Noble One — which are not 
associated with the supermundane (/okuttara) paths and fruitions of 
sotàpatti, etc. See ariya-puggala, A. 


lokuttara: 'supermundane', is a term for the four paths and four fruitions of 
sotàpatti, etc. (see ariya-puggala), with Nibbana as ninth. Hence one speaks 
of ‘nine supermundane things’ (nava-lokuttara-dhamma). See lokiya. 


loving kindness: mettà; see brahma-vihara. 
lower fetters, the five: see samyojana. 
lower worlds, the four: apdya (q.v.). 

low speech: tiracchana-kathà (q.v.). 


lust: see rága. 





94 | MACCHARIYA 


M 


macchariya: ‘stinginess’, avarice. “There are five kinds of stinginess, O 
monks; regarding the dwelling place, regarding families, regarding gain, 
regarding recognition, regarding mental things” (AN 9:49; Pug 56). 


mada: ‘infatuation’. “Infatuation is of three kinds: youth-infatuation, health- 
infatuation, life-infatuation” (DN 33). “Infatuated by youth-infatuation, by 
health-infatuation and by life-infatuation, the ignorant worldling pursues 
an evil course in bodily actions, speech and thought, and thereby, at the 
dissolution of the body, after death, passes to a lower world, to a woeful 
course of existence, to a state of suffering and hell” (AN 3:39). 


magga: ‘path. 1. For the four supermundane paths (lokuttara-magga), 
see ariya-puggala 2. The Eightfold Path (atthangika-magga) is the path 
leading to the extinction of suffering, i.e., the last of the Four Noble Truths 
(sacca, q.v.), namely: 


(1) Right view (samma-ditthi) . Le 
. r IT. Wisdom (paññā) 

(2) Right thought (sammáà-sankappa) | 

(3) Right speech (sammd-vdaca) |] 


(4) Right bodily action (sammd-kammanta) pI. Morality (sila) 
(5) Right livelihood (sammd-djtva) 


(6) Right effort (samma-vayama) . 
II. Concentration 


(7) Right mindfulness — (sammac-sati) (samādhi) 





(8) Right concentration (sammā-samādhi) 


(1) Right view or right understanding (sammd-ditthi) is the understanding of 
the Four Noble Truths about the universality of suffering (unsatisfactoriness), 
of its origin, its cessation, and the path leading to that cessation. See the 
Discourse on ‘Right Understanding (MN 9, translation and Com in The 
Discourse on Right View, by Bhikkhu Nanamoli, Wheel 377-379.). 


(2) Right thought (sammda-sankappa): thoughts free from sensuous desire, 
from ill will, and cruelty. 

(3) Right speech (sammd-vdaca): abstaining from lying, tale-bearing, harsh 
language, and foolish babble. 


(4) Rightbodilyaction(sammáà-kammanta): abstaining fromkilling, stealing, 
and sexual misconduct. 


(5) Right livelihood (samma-ajiva): abstaining from a livelihood that brings 
harm to other beings, such as trading in arms, in living beings, intoxicating 
drinks, poison; slaughtering, fishing, soldiering, deceit, treachery 
soothsaying, trickery, usury, etc. 





MAGGA | 95 


(6) Right effort (sammd-vayama): the effort of avoiding or overcoming evil 
and unwholesome things, and of developing and maintaining wholesome 
things (see padhana). 

(7) Right mindfulness (sammad-sati): mindfulness and awareness in 
contemplating body, feelings, mind, and mind-objects (see sati, satipatthana). 


(8) Rightconcentration (sammd-samadhi): concentration of mind associated 
with wholesome (kusala) consciousness, which eventually may reach the 
absorptions (jhana, q.v.). See samadhi. 


There are to be distinguished two kinds of concentration, mundane (/okiya) 
and supermundane (/okuttara) concentration. The latter is associated with 
those states of consciousness known as the four supermundane paths and 
fruitions (see ariya-puggala). As it is said in MN 117: 


“T tell you, O monks, there are two kinds of right view: the understanding that 
itis good to give alms and offerings, that both good and evil actions will bear 
fruitand will be followed by results... This, O monks, is a view which, though 
still subject to the cankers, is meritorious, yields worldly fruits, and brings 
good results. But whatever there is of wisdom, of penetration, of right view 
conjoined with the path —the holy path being pursued, this is called the 
supermundane right view (lokuttara-samma-ditthi), whichis not ofthe world, 
but which is supermundane and conjoined with the path." 


In a similar way the remaining links of the path are to be understood. 


As many of those who have written about the Eightfold Path have 
misunderstood its true nature, it is therefore appropriate to add here 
a few elucidating remarks about it, as this path is fundamental for the 
understanding and practice of the Buddha's teaching. 


First of all, the figurative expression ‘path’ should not be interpreted to mean 
that one has to advance step by step in the sequence of the enumeration 
until, after successively passing through all the eight stages, one finally may 
reach one's destination, Nibbana. If this really were the case, one should have 
realised, first of all, right view and penetration of the truth, even before one 
could hope to proceed to the next steps, right thought and right speech; and 
each preceding stage would be the indispensable foundation and condition 
for each succeeding stage. In reality, however, the links 3—5 constituting 
moral training (sila), are the first three links to be cultivated, then the links 
6-8 constituting mental training (samādhi), and at last right view, etc. 
constituting wisdom (paññā). 

It is, however, true that a really unshakeable and safe foundation to the path 
is provided only by right view which, starting from the tiniest germ of faith 
and knowledge, gradually, step by step, develops into penetrating insight 
(vipassana) and thus forms the immediate condition for the entrance into 
the four supermundane paths and fruits of holiness, and for the realisation 
of Nibbana. Only with regard to this highest form of supermundane insight, 
may we indeed say that all the remaining links of the path are nothing but 
the outcome and the accompaniments of right view. 





96 | MAGGAMAGGA-NANADASSANA-VISUDDHI 


Regarding the mundane (/okiya) eightfold path, however, its links may arise 
without the first link, right view. 


Here it must also be emphasised that the links of the path not only do not 
arise one after the other, as already indicated, but also that they, at least in 
part, arise simultaneously as inseparably associated mental factors in one and 
the same state of consciousness. Thus, for instance, under all circumstances 
at least four links are inseparably bound up with any karmically wholesome 
consciousness, namely 2, 6, 7 and 8, i.e., right thought, right effort, right 
mindfulness and right concentration (MN 117), so that as soon as any one of 
these links arises, the three others also do so. On the other hand, right view is 
not necessarily present in every wholesome state of consciousness. 


Magga is one of the twenty-four conditions (see paccaya 18). 
Literature: The Noble Eightfold Path and its Factors Explained, by Ledi 


Sayadaw (Wheel 245/247). The Buddhas Ancient Path, by Piyadassi Thera 
(BPS). The Noble Eightfold Path, by Bhikkhu Bodhi (Wheel 308/311). 


maggamagga-fianadassana-visuddhi: ‘purification by knowledge of what is 
path and non-path’, is one of the seven stages of purification (visuddhi V, q.v.). 


magga-paccaya: ‘path as a condition’, is one of the twenty-four conditions 
(paccaya, q.v.). 


magical powers: see iddhi; abhififia (1). 


maha-bhüta: the four ‘primary elements’, is another name for the four 
elements (dhàtu) underlying all corporeality; see dhatu. 


Maha-brahmano: the ‘great gods’; a class of heavenly beings in the fine- 
material world; see deva, II. 


mahaggata: lit., ‘grown great’, i.e., ‘developed’, exalted, supernormal. As 
mahaggata-citta, it is the state of ‘developed consciousness’, attained in 
the fine-material and immaterial absorptions (see jhdna); it is mentioned 
in the mind-contemplation of the Satipatthana Sutta (MN 10). As 
mahaggatarammana, it is the ‘developed mental object’ of those absorptions 
and is mentioned in the ‘object triad’ of the Abhidhamma schedule and 
Dhs (see Guide Ch. I A). 


mahapurisa-vitakka: the eight ‘thoughts of a great man’, are described in AN 
8:30, and DN 34. 


maha-vipassana: the eighteen ‘chief kinds of insight’; see vipassand. 
maintain: effort to maintain wholesome things; see padhdna. 


majjhima patipada: ‘Middle Path’, is the Noble Eightfold Path which, by 
avoiding the two extremes of sensual lust and self-torment, leads to 
enlightenment and deliverance from suffering. 

“To give oneself up to indulgence in sensual pleasure (kama-sukha), the 
base, common, vulgar, unholy, unprofitable; and also to give oneself up to 





MANAYATANA | 97 


self-torment (atta-kilamatha), the painful, unholy, unprofitable, both these 
two extremes the Perfect One has avoided and has found the Middle Path 
(see magga), which causes one both to see and to know, and which leads 
to peace, to discernment, to enlightenment, to Nibbana. It is the Noble 
Eightfold Path, the way that leads to the extinction of suffering, namely: 
right understanding, right thought, right speech, right bodily action, right 
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration” (SN 
56:11). 


mala: ‘stains’, is a term for the three karmically unwholesome roots 
(akusala-müla); greed, hate and delusion (/obha, dosa, moha). 


mana: ‘conceit’, pride, is one of the ten fetters binding to existence (see 
samyojana). It vanishes completely only at the entrance to arahatship, or 
holiness (see asmimana). It is further one of the proclivities (see anusaya) 
and defilements (see kilesa). 


The equality-conceit (mdna), the inferiority-conceit (omdna) and the 
superiority-conceit (atimdna): this threefold conceit should be overcome. 
For, after overcoming this threefold conceit, the monk, through the full 
penetration of conceit, is said to have put an end suffering” (AN 6:49). 


“Those ascetics and Brahman priests who, relying on this impermanent, 
miserable and transitory nature of corporeality, feelings, perceptions, mental 
formations and consciousness, fancy: ‘Better am’, or ‘Equal am’, or ‘Worse 
am I’, all these imagine thus through not understanding reality” (SN 22:49). 


In reality no ego-entity is to be found. See anattà. 


manasikara: ‘attention’, ‘mental advertence’, ‘reflection’. 


(1) As a psychological term, attention belongs to the formation-group 
(sankhara-kkhandha; see Table II) and is one of the seven mental factors 
(cetasika) that are inseparably associated with all states of consciousness 
(see cetand). In MN 9 it is given as one of the factors representative of 
mind (nama). It is the mind’s first ‘confrontation with an object’ and ‘binds 
the associated mental factors to the object.’ It is, therefore, the prominent 
factor in two specific classes of consciousness, i.e., ‘advertence (avajjana, 
q.v.) at the five sense-doors (Table I, 70) and at the mind-door (Table I, 71). 
These two states of consciousness, breaking through the subconscious life- 
continuum (bhavanga), form the first stage in the perceptual process (citta- 


vithi; see vilifiana-kicca). See Vism XIV, 152. 


(2) In a more general sense, the term appears frequently in the Suttas 
as yoniso-manasiküra, ‘wise (or reasoned, methodical) attention’ or ‘wise 
reflection’. It is said, in MN 2, to counteract the cankers (Gsava, q.v.); it is a 
condition for the arising of right view (see MN 43), of stream-entry (see 
sotdpattiyanga), and of the factors of enlightenment (see SN 46:2.49, 51). 
*Unwise attention’ (ayoniso-manasikdra) leads to the arising of the cankers 
(see MN 2) and of the five hindrances (see SN 46:2.51). 


manayatana: ‘mind-base’, is a collective term for all the different states of 
consciousness; see Gyatana. 





98 | MANGALA 


mangala: means, in general usage, anything regarded as ‘auspicious’, 
‘lucky’, or a ‘good omen’. Against the contemporary superstitious notions 
about it, the Buddha, in the Maha-mangala Sutta (Sn vv. 258ff.), set forth 
thirty-six ‘blessings’ that are truly auspicious, i.e., conducive to happiness, 
beginning with the ‘avoidance of bad company’ and ending with a ‘serene 
mind’. It is one of the most popular Suttas in Buddhist countries, and a 
fundamental text on Buddhist lay ethics. 


Translated in Everyman’ Ethics (Wheel 14). See also Lifes Highest 
Blessings, by Dr. R. L. Soni. (Wheel 254/256). 


mano: ‘mind’ is used in the Abhidhamma as synonym of vififiana 
(consciousness) and citta (state of consciousness, mind). According to 
the Commentary to Vism, it sometimes means subconsciousness (see 
bhavanga-sota). 


mano-dhatu: ‘mind-element’, is one of the eighteen elements (see dhàtu 
ID. This term, unlike mandyatana (q.v.), does not apply to the whole of 
consciousness, but designates only that special element of consciousness 
which first, at the beginning of the process of sense-perception, performs 
the function of advertence (Gvajjana; Table I, 70) to the sense-object, and 
then after twice having become conscious of it performs the function of 
reception (sampaticchana; Table I 39, 55) into mind-consciousness. See 
viiifiána-kicca. 


manodvaravajjana: see citta-vithi. 

Source note: Not found in the oldest parts of the Sutta Pitaka. 
mano-kamma: 'mental action'; see karma, kamma-patha. 
manomaya iddhi: see iddhi. 


Manopadosika-deva: ‘the celestial beings corruptible by temper’, are a class 
of devas (q.v.) of the sensuous sphere. “They spend their time in becoming 
annoyed with one another, and getting into a temper, and thus by being 
bodily and mentally exhausted, they pass from that world” (DN 1; 24). 


manopavicara: ‘mental indulging’. There are mentioned eighteen ways of 
indulging: six in gladness (somanassüpavicára), six in sorrow (domanassa), 
six in indifference (upekkha). “Perceiving with the eye a visible form... 
hearing with the ear a sound... being in mind conscious of an object, one 
indulges in the joy-producing object, the sorrow-producing object, the 
indifference-producing object...” (MN 137; AN 3:61). In the Commentary 
to AN, upavicara is said to be identical with vitakka-vicara (q.v.). 


mano-saficetana: ‘mental volition’; see Ghdra. 


manovififiana-dhatu: ‘mind-consciousness element’, is one of the eighteen 
‘elements’ (see dhàtu II). This term is generally used as a name for that 
consciousness-element which performs the functions of investigation 
(santirana), determining (votthapana), registering (tadárammana), etc. See 
Table I, 40, 41, 56, 71, 72. 





MARANA | 99 


Mara: (lit. ‘the killer’), is the Buddhist “Tempter-figure’. He is often called 
“Mara the Evil One’ (papimà māro) or Namuci (lit. ‘the non-liberator’, i.e., the 
opponent of liberation). He appears in the texts both as a real person (i.e., as 
a deity) and as personification of evil and passions, of the totality of worldly 
existence, and of death. Later Pali literature often speaks of a “fivefold Mara 
(pajica-mara): 1. Mara as a deity (devaputta-mara), 2. the Mara of defilements 
(kilesa-mara), 3. the Mara of the aggregates (khandha-mara), 4. the Mara of 
the karma-formations (kamma-mára), and 5. Mara as death (maccu-mdra). 


As areal person, Mara is regarded as the deity ruling over the highest heaven 
of the sensuous sphere (kamavacara), that of the paranimmitavasavatti-devas, 
the ‘deities wielding power over the creations of others’ (Commentary to MN 
1). According to tradition, when the Bodhisatta was seated under the Bodhi- 
tree, Mara tried in vain to obstruct his attainment of Enlightenment, first by 
frightening him through his hosts of demons, etc., and then by his three 
daughters’ allurements. This episode is called ‘Mara’s war’ (Mara-yuddha). 
For seven years Mara had followed the Buddha, looking for any weakness 
in him; that is, six years before the Enlightenment and one year after it (Sn 
v. 446). He also tried to induce the Buddha to pass away into Parinibbana 
without proclaiming the Dhamma, and also when the time for the Buddha's 
Parinibbàna had come, he urged him on. But the Buddha acted on his own 
insight in both cases. See DN 16. 


For (3) Mara as the aggregates, see SN 23:1, 11, 12, 23. See Padhana Sutta (Sn 
v. 425ff.); Mara Samyutta (SN 4). 


marana: death’, in ordinary usage, means the disappearance of the vital 
faculty confined to a single lifetime, and therewith of the psycho-physical 
life-process conventionally called ‘man’, ‘animal’, ‘personality’, ‘ego’, etc. 
Strictly speaking, however, death is the continually repeated dissolution 
and vanishing of each momentary physical-mental combination, and thus 
it takes place every moment. About this momentariness of existence, it is 
said in Vism VIII: 


“In the absolute sense, beings have only a very short moment to live, life 
lasting as long as a single moment of consciousness lasts. Just as a cart- 
wheel, whether rolling or whether at a standstill, at all times only rests on a 
single point of its periphery, even so the life of a living being lasts only for 
the duration of a single moment of consciousness. As soon as that moment 
ceases, the being also ceases. For it is said: ‘The being of the past moment 
of consciousness has lived, but does not live now, nor will it live in future. 
The being of the future moment has not yet lived, nor does it live now, but 
it will live in the future. The being of the present moment has not lived, it 
does live just now, but it will not live in the future." 


In another sense, the coming to an end of the psycho-physical life-process 
of the arahat, or perfectly holy one, at the moment of his passing away may 
be called the final and ultimate death, as up to that moment the psycho- 
physical life-process was still going on from life to life. 





100 | MARANASANNA-KAMMA 


Death, in the ordinary sense, combined with old age, forms the twelfth link 
in the formula of dependent origination (paticca-samuppada, q.v.). 


For death as a subject of meditation, see marandnussati; as a function of 
consciousness, see vififiGna-kicca. 


maranasanna-kamma: see karma. 


marananussati: ‘recollection of death’, is one of the ten recollections treated 
in detail in Vism VIII: 


“Recollection of death, developed and frequently practised, yields great 
reward, great blessing, has Deathlessness as its goal and object. But how 
may such recollection be developed? 


“As soon as the day declines, or as the night vanishes and the day is breaking, 
the monk thus reflects: ‘Truly, there are many possibilities for me to die: I 
may be bitten by a serpent, or be stung by a scorpion or a centipede, and 
thereby I may lose my life. But this would be an obstacle for me. Or I may 
stumble and fall to the ground, or the food eaten by me may not agree with 
my health; or bile, phlegm and piercing body gases may become disturbing, 
or men or ghosts may attack me, and thus I may lose my life. But this would 
be an obstacle for me.’ Then the monk has to consider thus: ‘Are there still 
to be found in me unsubdued evil, unwholesome things which, if I should 
die today or tonight, might lead me to suffering?’ Now, if he understands 
that this is the case, he should use his utmost resolution, energy, effort, 
endeavour, steadfastness, attentiveness and clear-mindedness in order to 
overcome these evil, unwholesome things” (AN 8:74). 


In Vism VIII it is said: “He who wishes to develop this meditation, should 
retreat to solitude, and while living secluded he should thus wisely reflect: 
“Death will come to me! The vital energy will be cut off!’ Or: “Death! Death! 
To him, namely, who does not wisely reflect, sorrow may arise by thinking 
on the death of a beloved person, just as to a mother while thinking on the 
death of her beloved child. Again, by reflecting on the death of a disliked 
person, joy may arise, just as to enemies while thinking on the death of their 
enemies. Through thinking on the death of an indifferent person, however, 
no emotion will arise, just as to a man whose work consists in cremating the 
dead at the sight of a dead body. And by reflecting on one's own death fright 
may arise... just as at the sight of a murderer with drawn sword one becomes 
filled with horror. Thus, whenever seeing here or there slain or other dead 
beings, one should reflect on the death of such deceased persons who once 
lived in happiness, and one should rouse one's attentiveness, emotion and 
knowledge and consider thus: *Death will come, etc.'... Only in him who 
considers in this way, will the hindrances (nivarana, q.v.) be repressed; and 
through the idea of death attention becomes steadfast, and the exercise 
reaches neighbourhood-concentration (upacára-samádhi)." 


According to Vism VIII, one may also reflect on death in the following 
various ways: one may think of it as a murderer with a drawn sword standing 
in front of oneself; or one may bear in mind that all happiness ends in death; 
or that even the mightiest beings on this earth are subject to death; or that 





MEAT-EATING | 101 


we must share this body with all those innumerable worms and other tiny 
beings residing therein; or that life is something dependent on in-and-out 
breathing, and bound up with it; or that life continues only as long as the 
elements, food, breath, etc. are properly performing their functions; or that 
nobody knows when, where, and under what circumstances, death will take 
place, and what kind of fate we have to expect after death; or that life is very 
short and limited. As it is said: “Short, indeed, is this life of men, limited, 
fleeting, full or woe and torment; it is just like a dewdrop that vanishes as 
soon as the sun rises; like a water-bubble; like a furrow drawn in the water; 
like a torrent dragging everything along and never standing still; like cattle 
for slaughter that every moment look death in the face” (AN 7:74). 

“The monk devoted to this recollection of death is at all times indefatigable, 
gains the idea of disgust with regard to all forms of existence, gives up 
delight in life, detests evil, does not hoard up things, is free from stinginess 
with regard to the necessities of life; the idea of impermanence (anicca) 
becomes familiar to him; and through pursuing it, the idea of misery 
(dukkha) and of impersonality (anatta) become present to him... Free from 
fear and bewilderment will he pass away at death; and should he not yet 
realise the Deathless State in his lifetime, he will at the dissolution of the 
body attain to a happy course of existence” (Vism VIII). 


See Buddhist Reflections on Death, by V. E Gunaratna (Wheel 102/103), and 
Buddhism and Death, by M.O’C. Walshe (Wheel 260). 


marvel: see patihdariya. 


mastery (regarding the absorptions): see vasi. Eight stages of mastery: 
abhibhàyatana (q.v.). 


material food: kabalinkarahara (q.v.). 

matter (corporeality): see khandha, rüpa-kalapa. 

matured one, the: gotrabhii (q.v.). 

maturity-knowledge: gotrabhü-fiüna; see visuddhi (VII). 
meaning (evident and to be inferred): see neyyattha-dhamma. 


meat-eating: just as the karmic, i.e., moral, quality of any action is determined 
by the quality of volition (cetana) underlying it, and independently of 
this volition nothing whatever can be called karmically wholesome or 
unwholesome (kusala, akusala), just so it is with the merely external act of 
meat-eating, this being as such purely non-moral, i.e., karmically neutral 
(avyakata). 

“In three circumstances meat-eating is to be rejected: if one has seen, or 
heard, or suspects (that the animal has been slaughtered expressly for one’s 
own sake)” (MN 55). For if in such a case one should partake of the meat, 
one would as it were approve the murder of animals, and thus encourage 
the animal-murderer in his murderous deeds. Besides, that the Buddha 
never objected, in ordinary circumstances, to meat-eating may be clearly 
understood from many passages of the Suttas (e.g. AN 5:44; 8:12; MN 55, 





102 | MEDITATION 


etc.), as also from the Vinaya, where it is related that the Buddha firmly 
rejected Devadattas proposal to forbid meat-eating to the monks; further 
from the fact that ten kinds of meat were (for merely external reasons) 
forbidden to the monks, namely from elephants, tigers, serpents, etc. 


See Amagandha Sutta (Sn); Early Buddhism and the Taking of Life, by I. B. 
Horner (Wheel 104). 


meditation: see bhàvanà, jhana, samadhi. 

mental action: mano-kamma; see karma. 

mental advertence: mano-dvàràvajjana; see àvajjana. 
mental formation: sankhdra (q.v.); see Table II. 
mental function: citta-sankhüra; see sankhara (2). 
mental image: see nimitta, kasina, samadhi. 

mental obduracy: ceto-khila (q.v.). 


merit, the four streams of: puñña-dhārā (q.v.). For transference of merit, 
see patti-dana. 


meritorious action: see puñña, pufifia-kiriya-vatthu. 

message, the ninefold of the Buddhasasana: see sásana. 
messengers, the three divine: see deva-diüta. 

method, the right: /iáya, is a term for the Eightfold Path (see magga) 


metta: ‘loving kindness’, is one of the four sublime abodes (brahma-vihara, 
q.v.). 


miccha-ditthi: miccha-ditthi sankappa, miccha-ditthi vācā, etc.: see micchà- 
magga. 


miccha-magga, atthangika: the ‘eightfold wrong path’, i.e., (1) wrong view 
(miccha-ditthi), (2) wrong thought (micchd-sankappa), (3) wrong speech 
(miccha-vaca), (4) wrong bodily action (miccha-kammanta), (5) wrong 
livelihood (miccha-àjiva), (6) wrong effort (miccha-vayama), (7) wrong 
mindfulness (micchd-sati), (8) wrong concentration (micchd-samdadhi). 
Just as the eightfold Right Path (sammd-magga), so also here the eight 
links are included in the group of mental formations (sankhdra-kkhandha; 
see khandha). The links 2, 6, 7, 8, are inseparably bound up with every 
karmically unwholesome state of consciousness. Often are also present 3, 
4, or 5, sometimes link 1. 


micchatta: ‘wrongnesses’, miccha-magga (q.v.). 


miccha-vaca: ‘wrong speech: false speech (musdvdda), tale-bearing 
(pisunà vaca), harsh or abusive speech (pharusaà vaca), idle chatter or 
gossip (samphappalapa). 


MUDUTA | 103 





middha: ‘sloth’. Combined with thina, ‘torpor’, it forms one of the 
five hindrances (nivarana, q.v.). Both may be associated with greedy 
consciousness (see Tables III and I, 23, 25, 27, 29). 


middle path: majjhimd patipada (q.v.). 

mind: mano (q.v.); see nama. 

mind and corporeality: ndma-riipa (q.v.). 

mind-base: mandyatana; see Gyatana. 
mind-consciousness-element: mano-viifiánadhatu (q.v.). 
mind-element: mano-dhátu (q.v.). 


mindfulness: sati (q.v.); see satipatthüna. Right mindfulness: see sacca, 
magga. 


mind-object: dhamma; see dyatana. Contemplation of the, see satipatthana 


(4). 

mind-training, ‘higher’: adhicitta-sikkhà, see sikkha. 
miracle: see patihariya. 

mirth (in the arahat): see hasituppdda-citta. 
misapprehension: see paramasa. 

misery, contemplation of: dukkhdnupassand; see ti-lakkhana. 


moha: ‘delusion’, is one of the three unwholesome roots (miila, q.v.). The 
best known synonym is avijjd (q.v.). 


moha-carita: the ‘deluded-natured’; see carita. 
momentariness (of existence): see marana. 
monkhood, the fruits of: samafifia-phala (q.v.). 


monks’ community: Sangha (q.v.); further see pabbajja, progress of the 
disciple. 


morality: sila (q.v.). Contemplation on, see anussati (4). 
morality-training, higher: adhisila-sikkha; see sikkha. 
moral rules, the five, eight or ten: see sikkha-pada. 


muccitu-kamyata-fiana: ‘knowledge consisting in the desire for 
deliverance’; see visuddhi (VI. 6). 


mudita: ‘altruistic (or sympathetic) joy’, is one of the four sublime abodes 
(brahma-vihara, q.v.). 


muduta (rüpa-mudutà, kāya-mudutā, citta-mudutd): ‘elasticity’ (of 
corporeality, mental factors, consciousness); see khandha (1) and Table II. 





104 | MULA 


Source note: Not found in this meaning in the oldest parts of the Sutta 
Pitaka; see lahutà. 


mila: ‘roots’, also called hetu (q.v; see paccaya, 1), are those conditions 
which through their presence determine the actual moral quality of 
a volitional state (cetand), and the consciousness and mental factors 
associated therewith, in other words, the quality of karma (q.v). There 
are six such roots, three karmically unwholesome and three wholesome 
roots, viz.,: greed, hate, delusion (lobha, dosa, moha), and greedlessness, 
hatelessness, undeludedness (alobha, adosa, amoha). 


In AN 3:68 it is said that greed arises through unwise reflection on an 
attractive object, hate through unwise reflection on a repulsive object. Thus, 
greed (lobha or raga) comprises all degrees of ‘attractedness’ towards an 
object from the faintest trace of a longing thought up to grossest egoism, 
while hatred (dosa) comprises all degrees of ‘repulsion’ from the faintest 
trace of ill-humour up to the highest pitch of hate and wrath. 


The three wholesome (kusala) roots, greedlessness, etc., though expressed 
in negative terms, nevertheless possess a distinctly positive character, just 
as is also often the case with negative terms in other languages, for example, 
the negative term ‘immortality’, which has a decidedly positive character. 


Thus, greedlessness (alobha) is a term for unselfishness, liberality, etc., 
hatelessness (adosa) for kindness or goodwill (metta), undeludedness 
(amoha) for wisdom (paññā). 


"The perception of impurity is to be developed in order to overcome 
greed (lust); loving kindness in order to overcome hate; wisdom in order 
to overcome delusion" (AN 6:107). "Killing, stealing, sexual misconduct, 
lying, tale-bearing, harsh language, frivolous talk, covetousness, ill will and 
wrong views (see kamma-patha), these things are due either to greed, or 
hate, or delusion" (AN 10:174). 


“Enraptured with lust (greed), enraged with hate, blinded by delusion, 
overwhelmed, with mind ensnared, man aims at his own ruin, at others 
ruin, at the ruin of both, and he experiences mental pain and grief. And 
he follows evil ways in deeds, words and thought... And he really knows 
neither his own welfare, nor the welfare of others, nor the welfare of both. 
These things make him blind and ignorant, hinder his knowledge, are 
painful, and do not lead him to peace." 


The presence or absence of the three unwholesome roots forms part of the 
mind contemplation in the Satipatthana Sutta (MN 10). They are also used 
for the classification of unwholesome consciousness (see Table I). 


See The Roots of Good and Evil, by Nyanaponika Thera (Wheel 251/253). 
multiformity-perceptions: nànatta-saiifia; see jhàna (5). 


mundane: lokiya (q.v.). 





MUTABILITY | 105 


musavada: false speech; see micchd-vdcd. 


mutability, contemplation of: viparindmdnupassand: see vipassaná. 





106 | NAMA 


N 


nama: (lit. ‘name’): ‘mind’, ‘mentality’. This term is generally used as a 
collective name for the four mental groups (arüpino khandha), viz. 
feeling (vedaná), perception (saññā), mental formations (sarikhdra) and 
consciousness (vififidna). Within the fourth link (nàma-rüpa) in the formula 
of the paticca-samuppáda (q.v.), however, it applies only to karma resultant 
(vipáka) feeling and perception and a few karma resultant mental functions 
inseparable from any consciousness. As it is said (MN 9; DN 15; SN 
12:2): “Feeling (vedand), perception (safifía), volition (cetana), impression 
(phassa), mental advertence (manasikára): this, O brother, is called mind 
(nàma)." With the addition of two more mental factors, namely, mental 
vitality (Jivita) and concentration (samādhi), here ‘stationary phase of mind’ 
(cittatthiti), these seven factors are said in the Abhidhammattha-sangaha to 
be the inseparable mental factors in any state of consciousness. 


For the complete list of all the fifty mental formations of the sarkhàra- 
kkhandha (not including feeling and perception), see Table II. 


nama-kaya: the 'mind-group (as distinguished from rūpa-kāya, the 
corporeality-group) comprises the four immaterial groups of existence 
(arüpino khandha; see khandha). This twofold grouping, frequent in the 
Commentaries, occurs first in DN 15, also in Patis (I, 183); nàma-káya alone 
is mentioned in Sn 1074. 


nàma-rüpa (lit. ‘name and form’): ‘mind-and-body’, mentality and 
corporeality. It is the fourth link in dependent origination (see paticca- 
samuppáda 3, 4) where it is conditioned by consciousness, and on its part 
is the condition of the sixfold sense-base. In two texts (DN 14, 15), which 
contain variations of dependent origination, the mutual conditioning of 
consciousness and mind-and-body is described (see also SN 12:67), and the 
latter is said to be a condition of sense-impression (phassa); so also in Sn 872. 


The third of the seven purifications (see visuddhi), the purification of views, 
is defined in Vism XVIII as the "correct seeing of mind-and-body,” and 
various methods for the discernment of mind-and-body by way of insight 
meditation (vipassand, q.v.) are given there. In this context, ‘mind’ (nama, 
q.v.) comprises all four mental groups, including consciousness. 


In five-group-existence (pafica-voküra-bhava, q.v), mind-and-body are 
inseparable and interdependent; and this has been illustrated by comparing 
them with two sheaves of reeds propped against each other: when one falls 
the other will fall, too; and with a blind man with stout legs, carrying on 
his shoulders a lame cripple with keen eye-sight: only by mutual assistance 
can they move about efficiently (see Vism XVIII, 32ff.). On their mutual 
dependence, see also paticca-samuppdda (3). 


ATA-PARINNA | 107 





With regard to the impersonality and dependent nature of mind and 
corporeality it is said: 

“Sound is not a thing that dwells inside the conch shell and comes out 
from time to time, but due to both, the conch-shell and the man that blows 
it, sound comes to arise: Just so, due to the presence of vitality, heat and 
consciousness, this body may execute the acts of going, standing, sitting 
and lying down, and the five sense organs and the mind may perform their 
various functions” (DN 23). 


“Just as a wooden puppet though unsubstantial, lifeless and inactive may 
by means of pulling strings be made to move about, stand up, and appear 
full of life and activity; just so are mind and body, as such, something empty, 
lifeless and inactive; but by means of their mutual working together, this 
mental and bodily combination may move about, stand up, and appear full 
of life and activity.” 


fíana: ‘knowledge, comprehension, intelligence, insight’, is a synonym for 
paniid (q.v.); see also vipassana. 


Source note: Of the nine kinds of insight-knowledge constituting 
the patipada-ndnadassana-visuddhi (see Vism XXI), the following 
six are, as such, enumerated and explained for the first time in Patis, 
namely: udayabbayanupassana-fiána (I. 54—57), bhangadnupassana- 
nana, (ibid.  57ff), | bhayatupatthüna-fiana (ibid. — 5Off.), 
muccitukamyata-nana, patisankha-fiána, sankhürupekkha-fiána (ibid. 
60-65). The terms udayabbaya and bharga, in connection with the 
five groups of existence, however, are often met with in the old Sutta 
texts. Of the remaining three kinds of knowledge, adinavanupassaná, 
nibbidánupassanà and anuloma-fiana, the first two occur often in the 
old Sutta texts, while anuloma-idna, though only briefly mentioned 
in the Abhidhamma Canon (in the Patthana), plays a prominent part 
in the exegetical literature. 


fianadassana-visuddhi: purificationofknowledgeandvision' ,isthelastofthe 
seven purifications and a name for path-knowledge (magga-iiána), i.e., the 
penetrating realisation of the path of stream-winning, once-returning, non- 
returning or arahatship. Vism XXII furnishes a detailed explanation of it (see 
visuddhi, VII). 


In AN 4:41 fianadassana apparently means the divine eye (dibba-cakkhu, 
see abhiíifia), being produced through concentrating the mind on light. 


nanatta-safífía: the ‘variety- (or multiformity-) perceptions’ are explained 
under jhàna (q.v.). 


fíana-vipphara iddhi: the ‘power of penetrating knowledge’, is one of the 
magical powers (iddhi, q.v.). 


fiata-parifífía: ‘full understanding (or comprehension) of the known’, is one 
of the three kinds of full understanding (pariifia, q.v.). 





108 | NATTHIKA-DITTHI 


natthika-ditthi: ‘nihilistic view’ (a doctrine that all values are baseless, 
that nothing is knowable or can be communicated, and that life itself is 
meaningless); see ditthi. 


natthi-paccaya: ‘absence-condition’, is one of the twenty-four conditions 
(paccaya, q.v.). 


Source note: First found in the Patthana of the Abhidhamma Canon. 
natural morality: pakati-sila (q.v.). 
navanga-buddha-sasana (or navanga-satthu-sasana): see sdsana. 
nava-sattavasa: see sattavasa. 
naya-vipassana: see kaldpa (2). 


fíaya: ‘right method’, is often used as a name for the Noble Eightfold Path 
(see magga), e.g. in the Satipatthana Sutta (MN 10, DN 22). 


neighbourhood-concentration: upacára-samádhi (q.v.). 


nekkhamma: ‘freedom from sensual lust’, ‘renunciation’. Though apparently 
from nir + Y kram, ‘to go forth (into the homeless state of a monk)’, this term 
is in the Pali texts nevertheless used as if it were derived from kama, lust, 
and always as an antonym to kama. It is one of the perfections (see param). 
nekkhamma sankappa, ‘thought free from lust’, or ‘thought of renunciation’, 
is one of the three kinds of right thought (sammd-sankappa), the second link 
of the Noble Eightfold Path (see magga, 2), its antonym being kamasankappa, 
‘lustful thought’. 


nesajjikanga: one of the thirteen dhutanga (q.v.). 
neutral, karmically: avydkata (q.v.); neutral feelings, see vedand. 


n'eva-saíifia-n'asafifiayatana: the ‘sphere of neither-perception-nor-non- 
perception', is the name for the fourth absorption of the immaterial sphere 
(arüpàávacara), a semi-conscious state, which is surpassed only by the state 
of complete suspense of consciousness, called ‘attainment of extinction’ 
(nirodha-samapatti, q.v.). See jhàna (8). 


n'eva-sekha-n'asekha: ‘neither in training nor beyond training’, i.e., neither 
learner nor master. Thus is called the worldling (puthujjana, q.v.), for he 
is neither pursuing the threefold training (sikkhd, q.v.) in morality, mental 
culture and wisdom, on the level of the first three paths of sanctity, nor has 
he completed his training as an arahat. See sekha. 


While the terms sekha and asekha occur frequently in the old Sutta texts (e.g. 
AN 2:4: sekho ca asekho ca imasmim loke... Ghuneyy4, etc.), the term n'eva- 
sekha-n’asekha is only found in the Sangitisutta (DN 33), as one of the three 
persons along with the sekha and asekha. 


neyya: ‘requiring guidance’, is said of a person “who through advice and 
questioning, through wise consideration, and through frequenting noble- 





NIBBANA | 109 


minded friends, having intercourse with them, associating with them, 
gradually comes to penetrate the truth" (Pug 162). See ugghatitafifiü. 


neyyattha-dhamma: a ‘teaching the meaning of which is implicit, or has to be 
inferred’ as contrasted with a ‘teaching with an explicit or evident meaning’ 
(nitatthadhamma). 


In AN 1:60 (PTS) itis said, ^Whoso declares a Sutta with an implicit meaning 
as a Sutta with explicit meaning (and conversely), such a one makes a false 
statement with regard to the Blessed One." See paramattha. 


Nibbana, (Skr Nirvāna): lit. ‘extinction’ (nir + Y và, ‘to cease blowing’, 
‘to become extinguished’); according to the commentaries, ‘freedom from 
desire’ (nir + vdna). Nibbana constitutes the highest and ultimate goal 
of all Buddhist aspirations, i.e., absolute extinction of that life-affirming 
will manifested as greed, hate and delusion, and convulsively clinging to 
existence; and therewith also the ultimate and absolute deliverance from 
all future rebirth, old age, disease and death, from all suffering and misery. 
See parinibbana. 


“Extinction of greed, extinction of hate, extinction of delusion: this is called 
Nibbana” (SN 38:1). The two aspects of Nibbana are: 


(1) The full extinction of defilements (kilesa-parinibbana), also called sa- 
upddi-sesa-nibbdna (see It 41), i.e., ‘Nibbana with the groups of existence still 
remaining’ (see upddi). This takes place at the attainment of arahatship, or 
perfect holiness (see ariya-puggala). 


(2) The full extinction of the groups of existence (khandha-parinibbana), 
also called an-upadi-sesa-nibbüna (see It 41, AN 4:118), i.e., ‘Nibbana 
without the groups remaining’, in other words, the coming to rest, or rather 
the ‘no-more-continuing’ of this physical-mental process of existence. This 
takes place at the death of the arahat (see Nibbana). 


Sometimes both aspects take place at one and the same moment, i.e., at the 
death of the arahat; see sama-sis7. 


“This, O monks, truly is the peace, this is the highest, namely the end of all 
formations, the forsaking of every substratum of rebirth, the fading away of 
craving, detachment, extinction, Nibbana" (AN 3:32). 


“Enraptured with lust (raga), enraged with anger (dosa), blinded by delusion 
(moha), overwhelmed, with mind ensnared, man aims at his own ruin, at the 
ruin of others, at the ruin of both, and he experiences mental pain and grief. 
But if lust, anger and delusion are given up, man aims neither at his own 
ruin, nor at the ruin of others, nor at the ruin of both, and he experiences no 
mental pain and grief. Thus is Nibbana visible in this life, immediate, inviting, 
attractive, and comprehensible to the wise" (AN 3:55). 


“Just as a rock of one solid mass remains unshaken by the wind, even 
so neither visible forms, nor sounds, nor odours, nor tastes, nor bodily 
impressions, neither the desired nor the undesired, can cause such a one to 
waver. Steadfast is his mind, gained is deliverance" (AN 6:55). 





110 | NIBBATTI 


“Verily, there is an unborn, unoriginated, uncreated, unformed. If there were 
not this unborn, unoriginated, uncreated, unformed, escape from the world 
of the born, the originated, the created, the formed, would not be possible” 
(Ud 8.3). 


One cannot too often and too emphatically stress the fact that not only 
for the actual realisation of the goal of Nibbana, but also for a theoretical 
understanding of it, itis an indispensable preliminary condition to grasp fully 
the truth of anattd (q.v.), the egolessness and insubstantiality of all forms of 
existence. Without such an understanding, one will necessarily misconceive 
Nibbana— according to one’s either materialistic or metaphysical leanings 
— either as annihilation of an ego, or as an eternal state of existence into 
which an ego or self enters or with which it merges. Hence it is said: 


“Mere suffering exists, no sufferer is found; 

The deed is, but no doer of the deed is there; 

Nibbana is, but not the man that enters it; 

The path is, but no traveller on it is seen.” (Vism XVI, 90) 


Literature: For texts on Nibbana, see PD § 36ff. See Vism XVI, 64ff. Anatta 
and Nibbana, by Nyanaponika Thera (Wheel 11); The Buddhist Doctrine 
of Nibbana, by Ven. P. Vajirafiana and Francis Story (Wheel 165/166). 


Source note: The two terms kilesa- and khandha-parinibbàna (or 
-nibbüna) are found only in the Commentaries; their corresponding 
two aspects sa-upddisesa and anupadisesa-nibbüna, however, are 
mentioned and explained in It 44. 


nibbatti: ‘arising’, ‘rebirth’, is a synonym for patisandhi (q.v.). 


nibbedha-bhagiya-sila (-samadhi, -pafifia): ‘morality (concentration, 
wisdom) connected with penetration’; see hàna-bhágiya-sila. 


nibbidanupassana-fiana: ‘contemplation of aversion’, is one of the eighteen 
chief kinds of insight; see vipassand (4), samatha-vipassanà (2), visuddhi 
(VL 5). 


nicca-saíifia (-citta, -ditthi): ‘perception (or consciousness, or view) of 
permanency , is one of the four perversions (vipallasa, q.v.). 


nihilistic view: natthika-ditthi; see ditthi. 
nila-kasina: ‘blue-kasina exercise’; see kasina. 


nimitta: ‘mark’, 'sign'; ‘image’; ‘target’, ‘object’; 'cause', 'condition'. These 
meanings are used in, and adapted to, many contexts of which only the 
doctrinal ones are mentioned here. 


(1) *Mental (reflex-) image', obtained in meditation. In full clarity, it will 
appear in the mind by successful practice of certain concentration exercises 
and will then appear as vividly as if seen by the eye. The object perceived 
at the very beginning of concentration is called the preparatory image 
(parikamma-nimitta). The still unsteady and unclear image, which arises 





NIRAYA | 111 


when the mind has reached a weak degree of concentration, is called the 
acquired image (uggaha-nimitta). An entirely clear and immovable image 
arising at a higher degree of concentration is the counter-image (patibhága- 
nimitta). As soon as this image arises, the stage of neighbourhood (or 
access) concentration (upacára-samádhi) is reached. For further details, 
see kasina, samadhi. 


(2) ‘Sign of (previous) kamma (kamma-nimitta) and ‘sign of (the future) 
destiny’ (gati-nimitta); these arise as mental objects of the last karmic 
consciousness before death (marandsanna-kamma); see p. 82, karma (3). 


Usages (1) and (2) are commentarial. In Sutta usage, the term occurs, e.g., 
as: 


(3) ‘Outward appearance: of one who has sense-control it is said that “he 
does not seize upon the general appearance’ of an object" (na nimittaggahi; 
MN 38, DN 2; explained in Vism I, 54ff.; see sila). 

(4) ‘Object’: the six objects, i.e., visual, etc. (rüpa-nimitta; SN 22:3). Also, 
when in explanation of animitta-cetovimutti, ‘signless deliverance of mind’ 
(see cetovimutti, vimokkha), it is said, sabba-nimittanam amanasikara, it 
refers to the six sense-objects (Commentary to MN 43), and has therefore 
to be rendered “by paying no attention to any object (or object-ideas)." A 
pleasant or beautiful object (subha-nimitta, q.v.) is a condition to the arising 
of the hindrance of sense-desire; a ‘repellent object’ (patigha-nimitta) 
for the hindrance of ill will; contemplation on the impurity of an object 
(asubha-nimitta; see asubha) is an antidote to sense desire. 


(5) In Patis II, in a repetitive series of terms, nimitta appears together with 
uppádo 'origin of existence', pavattam 'continuity of existence', and may 
then be rendered by ‘condition of existence’ (see PD § 194ff.). 


Source note: As signifying the mental reflex-image occurring in 
meditation, this term, singly or in compounds (parikamma-nimitta, 
uggaha-nimitta, patibhadga-nimitta), is found only in the Commentaries, 
Vism, etc. The same holds good for kamma-nimitta and gati-nimitta. 


Nimmana-rati: the name of a class of heavenly beings of the sensuous 
sphere; see deva. 


nine abodes of beings: see sattdvasa. 
ninefold dispensation: see sásana. 
nippapafica: see papaiica. 


nipphanna-rüpa: ‘produced corporeality’, is identical with rüpa-rüpa, 
'corporeality proper, ie., material or actual corporeality as contrasted 
with 'unproduced corporeality’ (anipphanna-riipa), consisting of mere 
qualities or modes of corporeality, e.g. impermanence, etc., which are also 
enumerated among the twenty-eight phenomena of the corporeality group. 
See khandha, Summary I; Vism XIV, 73. 


niraya: lit. ‘the downward-path', the nether or infernal world, usually 
translated by ‘hell’, is one of the four lower courses of existence (apdya, 





112 | NIRODHA 


q.v.). Buddhists are well aware that on account of the universal sway of 
impermanence a life in hell, just as in heaven, cannot last eternally, but 
will, after exhaustion of the karma which has caused the respective form 
of rebirth, necessarily be followed again by a new death and a new rebirth, 
according to the stored-up karma. 


nirodha: ‘extinction’; see nirodha-samapatti, anupubba-nirodha. 


nirodhanupassana: ‘contemplation of extinction’, is one of the eighteen 
chief kinds of insight (vipassand, q.v.). See Gndpana-sati (15). 


nirodha-samapatti: ‘attainment of extinction’ (SN 14:11), also called saññā- 
vedayita-nirodha, ‘extinction of feeling and perception’, is the temporary 
suspension of all consciousness and mental activity, following immediately 
upon the semi-conscious state called ‘sphere of neither-perception-nor-non- 
perception’ (see jhdna, 8). The absolutely necessary preconditions to its 
attainment are said to be perfect mastery of all the eight absorptions (jhana), 
as well as the previous attainment of non-returner-ship or arahatship (see 
ariya-puggala). 

According to Vism XXIII, the entering into this state takes place in the 
following way: by means of mental tranquillity (samatha) and insight 
(vipassana) one has to pass through all the eight absorptions one after the 
other up to the sphere of neither-perception-nor-non-perception and then 
one has to bring this state to an end. If, namely, according to the Vism, the 
disciple (non-returner or arahat) passes through the absorption merely by 
means of tranquillity, i.e., concentration, he will only attain the sphere of 
neither-perception-nor-non-perception, and then come to a standstill; if, 
on the other hand, he proceeds only with insight, he will reach the fruition 
(phala) of non-returner-ship or arahatship. He, however, who by means of 
both faculties has risen from absorption to absorption and, having made 
the necessary preparations, brings the sphere of neither-perception- 
nor-non-perception to an end, such a one reaches the state of extinction. 
While the disciple is passing through the eight absorptions, he each time 
emerges from the absorption attained, and regards with his insight all the 
mental phenomena constituting that special absorption, as impermanent, 
miserable and impersonal. Then he again enters the next higher absorption, 
and thus, after each absorption practising insight, he at last reaches the state 
of neither-perception-nor-non-perception, and thereafter the full extinction. 
This state, according to the Commentaries, may last for seven days or even 
longer. Immediately at the rising from this state, however, there arises in the 
non-returner the fruition of non-returner-ship (anagàámi-phala), in the arahat 
the fruition of arahatship (arahatta-phala). 


With regard to the difference existing between the monk abiding in this state 
of extinction on the one hand, and a dead person on the other hand, MN 43 
says: "In him who is dead, and whose life has come to an end, the bodily 
(in-and-outbreathing), verbal (thought conception and discursive thinking), 





NIVARANA | 113 


and mental functions (see sarkhàra, 2) have become suspended and come 
to a standstill, life is exhausted, the vital heat extinguished, the faculties are 
destroyed. Also in the monk who has reached ‘extinction of perception and 
feeling (safifia-vedayita-nirodha), the bodily, verbal and mental functions 
have been suspended and come to a standstill, but life is not exhausted, the 
vital heat not extinguished, and the faculties are not destroyed." 


For details, see Vism XXIII; for texts see PD $ 206. 


nirutti-patisambhida: the 'analytical knowledge of language', is one of the 
four patisambhidà (q.v.). 


nirvana (Skr): Nibbana (q.v.). 


nissarana-pahana: ‘overcoming by escape’, is one of the five kinds of 
overcoming (pahdna, q.v.). 


Source note: In the Tipitaka only found in the Patisambhidamagga. 


nissaya: ‘foundation’. The two wrong foundations of morality are craving 
(tanha-nissaya) and views (ditthi-nissaya). Hence there are two wrong bases 
of morality: morality based oncraving (tanha-nissita-sila) and morality based 
on views (ditthi-nissita-sila). 

“Based on craving’ is that kind of morality which has come about by the 
desire for a happy existence, e.g.: 'O that by this morality I might become a 
godlikeorheavenly being!’ (AN9:172).*Basedonviews' isthatmorality which 
has been induced by the view that through the observation of certain moral 
rules purification may be attained" (Vism I). 


Source note: In the Tipitaka tanha-nissaya and -nissita are only found 
in the Niddesa, however, ditthi-nissaya is already found in MN 22 and 
DN 28. 


nissaya-paccaya: ‘support’, ‘base’, ‘foundation’, is one of the twenty-four 
conditions (see paccaya, 8). 


nitattha-dhamma: a ‘doctrine with evident meaning’, contrasted with a 
‘doctrine with a meaning to be inferred’ (neyyattha-dhamma, q.v.). See also 
paramattha. 


nivarana: ‘hindrances’, are five qualities which are obstacles to the mind 
and blind our mental vision. In the presence of them we cannot reach 
neighbourhood-concentration (upacára-samáüdhi) and full concentration 
(appanàá-samadhi), and are unable to discern clearly the truth. They are: 

(1) sensuous desire (kamacchanda), 

(2) ill will (vyapada), 

(3) sloth and torpor (thina-middha), 

(4) restlessness and scruples (uddhacca-kukkucca), and 

(5) sceptical doubt (vicikicchd; q.v.). 


In the beautiful similes in AN 5:193, sensuous desire is compared with water 





114 | NIYAMA 


mixed with manifold colours, ill will with boiling water, sloth and torpor 
with water covered by moss, restlessness and scruples with agitated water 
whipped by the wind, sceptical doubt with turbid and muddy water. Just as 
in such water one cannot perceive one’s own reflection, so in the presence of 
these five mental hindrances, one cannot clearly discern one’s own benefit, 
nor that of others, nor that of both. 


Regarding the temporary suspension of the five hindrances on entering the 
first absorption, the typical Sutta text (e.g., AN 9:40) runs as follows: 


“He has cast away sensuous desire; he dwells with a heart free from sensuous 
desire; from desire he cleanses his heart. 


“He has cast away ill will; he dwells with a heart free from ill will, cherishing 
love and compassion toward all living beings, he cleanses his heart from ill 
will. 


“He has cast away sloth and torpor; he dwells free from sloth and torpor; 
loving the light, with watchful mind, with clear consciousness, he cleanses 
his mind from sloth and torpor. 


“He has cast away restlessness and scruples; dwelling with mind undisturbed, 
with heart full of peace, he cleanses his mind from restlessness and scruples. 


“He has cast away sceptical doubt; dwelling free from doubt, full of 
confidence in the good, he cleanses his heart from doubt. 


“He has put aside these five hindrances, and come to know these paralysing 
defilements of the mind. And far from sensual impressions, far from 
unwholesome things, he enters into the first absorption, etc.” 


The overcoming of these five hindrances by the absorptions is, as already 
pointed out, a merely temporary suspension, called ‘overcoming through 
repression’ (vikkhambhana-pahana). They disappear forever on entering 
the four supermundane paths (see ariya-puggala), i.e., sceptical doubt on 
attaining stream-Entry; sensuous desire, ill will and mental worry on attaining 
once-returner; sloth, torpor and restlessness on reaching arahatship. 


For their origination and their overcoming, see AN 1:2; 6:21; SN 46:51. 
See The Five Mental Hindrances, by Nyanaponika Thera (Wheel 26). 


niyama: the ‘fixedness of law’ regarding all things; see tathatà. Pafica-niyama 
is acommentarial term, signifying the ‘fivefold lawfulness’ or ‘natural order’ 
that governs: (1) temperature, seasons and other physical events (utu-niyama); 
(2) the plant life (bija-niyama); (3) karma (kamma-niyáma); (4) the mind 
(citta-niyama), e.g. the lawful sequence of the functions of consciousness 
(see vififiána-kicca) in the process of cognition; (5) certain events connected 
with the Dhamma (dhamma-niyama), e.g. the typical events occurring in the 
lives of the Buddhas. 


Source note: The compound words utu-, bija-, kamma-, citta-, and 
dhamma-niyama, occur for the first time in the Commentaries. 
Niyàmatà, however, occurs often in the old Sutta texts, e.g. thità va sa 
dhatu dhammatthitatà dhammaniyamata... (A MI 134, etc.). 





NUTRIMENT | 115 


niyata-miccha-ditthi: ‘wrong views with fixed destiny’, are the views of 
uncausedness of existence (ahetukaditthi), of the inefficacy of action 
(akiriya-ditthi), and nihilism (natthika-ditthi). For details, see ditthi and MN 
60, Commentary (Wheel 98/99). 


Source note: This term is first found in the Patthana of the 
Abhidhamma; however, as micchaditthi niyatà it is first found in the 
Dhammasangani. As a name for the tenth and last of the akusala- 
kamma-pathas, it plays a prominent role in the Commentaries. 


niyata-puggala: a ‘person with a fixed destiny’, may be either one who has 
committed one of the five ‘heinous deeds with immediate result’ (Gnantarika- 
kamma, q.v.), or one who follows ‘wrong views with fixed destiny’ (niyata- 
micchda-ditthi, q.v.), or one who has reached one of the four stages of holiness 
(see ariya-puggala). About the latter, see the frequent passage: “Those 
disciples in whom the three fetters (of personality-belief, sceptical doubt 
and attachment to mere rules and ritual; see samyojana) have vanished, they 
all have entered the stream, have forever escaped the states of woe; fixed is 
their destiny (niyata), assured their final enlightenment.” 


noble abodes: see vihdra. 


noble family, passing from noble family to noble family: kolarikola; see 
sotapanna. 


noble persons: ariya-puggala (q.v.). 
noble power: ariya-iddhi; see iddhi. 


noble truths, the four: ariya-saccá; see sacca. The twofold knowledge of 
the noble truths; see sacca-iiána. 


noble usages, the four: ariya-vamsa (q.v.). 


non-disappearance: avigata-paccaya, is one of the twenty-four conditions 
(paccaya, q.v.). 


non-violence: see avihimsd. 
non-self: see anatta. 


no-upàda-rüpa: 'underived corporeality’, designates the four primary 
elements (mahabhütà or dhdtuyo), as distinguished from the ‘derived 
corporeality' (upadà-rüpa), such as the sensitive organs, etc. See khandha, I. 


nutriment: see ojàá, Ghdara. Nutriment is one of the twenty-four conditions 
(paccaya, q.v.); nutriment-produced corporeality, see samutthana. 





116 | OBDURACIES 


O 


obduracies, the five mental: ceto-khila (q.v.). 


obhasa: ‘effulgence of light’, aura, appearing at times during deep insight 
(vipassana), may become a defilement of insight’ (vipassanüpakkilesa); see 
visuddhi, V. 


object: drammana (q.v.); as condition, see paccaya (2). 


obstacles, the ten obstacles of meditation: palibodha (q.v.); for the five 
mental obstacles, or hindrances, see nivarana. 


odata-kasina: ‘white-kasina-exercise’; see kasina. 
ogha: ‘floods’, is a term for the four cankers (Gsava, q.v.). 


oja: ‘nutriment’ (synonym of ahara, q.v.), is one of those eight minimal 
constituent parts, or qualities, of all corporeality, to wit: the solid, liquid, heat, 
motion; colour, odour, taste and nutriment. This is the 'octad with nutriment 
as the eighth (factor)’ (ojatthamaka-kalàpa), also called the ‘pure eightfold 
unit’ (suddhatthaka-kalapa), being the most primitive material combination. 
For further details, see rüpa-kalapa. 


okkanti: ‘conception’, lit. ‘descent’, designates the appearance of the embryo 
in the mother’s womb, i.e., the beginning of the birth process (jāti, q.v.). 
“Through the concurrence of three circumstances arises the embryo. When 
father and mother have united,... and the mother has her time, and the 
‘genius’ (metaphorically for the karma energy) is ready; under these three 
circumstances does the embryo appear” (MN 38). 


old age: jard (q.v.), is one of the three divine messengers (see devadiita). 
olfactory organ: see dyatana. 

omana: ‘inferiority-conceit’; see māna. 

once-eater, the practice of the: see dhutanga. 

one-group existence: eka-vokdra-bhava (q.v.). 


one-pointedness of mind (citt’ekaggata): a name for mental concentration 
(samadhi, q.v.). 


opapatika: lit. ‘accidental’ (from upapata, accident; not from upapatti,as PED 
has); ‘spontaneously born’, i.e., born without the instrumentality of parents. 
This applies to all heavenly and infernal beings. “After the disappearing of 
the five lower fetters (samyojana, q.v.), he (the non-returner) appears in a 
spiritual world (opapátika). .." 


open air, practice of living in the: see dhutanga. 





OVERCOMING | 117 


opposite: ‘overcoming by the opposite,’ see pahdna. 


orambhagiya-sam yojana: the ‘lower fetters', i.e., the first five fetters that bind 
to lower existence; see samyojana. 


origination, dependent: paticca-samuppáda (q.v.). 
origination of corporeality: see samutthana. 
ottappa: ‘moral dread’; see hiri-ottappa. 


overcoming, the five kinds of: see pahdna. Full understanding consisting 
in overcoming, see pariññā. The effort to overcoming, see padhdna. 
Overcoming doubt, the purification by, see visuddhi, IV. 





118 | PABBAJJA 


p 


pabbajja: lit. ‘the going forth’, or more fully stated, ‘the going forth from 
home to homelessness’ of a monk (agdrasmd anagdariyam pabbajja), consists 
in severing all family and social ties to live the pure life of a monk, in order 
to realise the goal of final deliverance pointed out by the Enlightened One. 
Thus, pabbajjá has become the name for admission as a sémanera, or novice, 
i.e., as a candidate for the order of bhikkhus, or monks. 


See Going Forth, by Sumana Samanera (Wheel 27/28), and Ordination in 
Theravada Buddhism (Wheel 56). 


paccavekkhana-fiana: ‘retrospective knowledge’, refers to the recollected 
mental image obtained in concentration, or to any inner experience just 
passed, as for instance, any absorption (jhdna q.v.), or any supermundane 
path, or fruition of the path, etc. (see ariya-puggala). As it is said: "At the 
end of fruitional consciousness, consciousness sinks into the subconscious 
stream of existence (bhavanga-sota, q.v.). Then, breaking off the stream of 
existence, mental advertence (manodvaravajjana) arises at the mind-door, 
for the purpose of retrospecting the (just passed) path-moment. Now, as 
soon as this stage has passed, seven moments of impulsive consciousness 
(javana-citta), one after the other, flash up while retrospecting the path. 
After they again have sunk into the subconscious stream, there arise, for the 
purpose of retrospecting the fruition of the path the moments of advertence 
and impulsion, during whose arising the monk is retrospecting the path, 
retrospecting the fruition, retrospecting the abandoned defilements, 
retrospecting the still remaining defilements, retrospecting Nibbana as 
object... "This blessing have I attained’... “This and that defilement still 
remains in me’... “This object have I beheld in my mind’, etc.” (Vism XXII). 


paccavekkhana-suddhi: ‘purity ofreflection’, is aterm for wise consideration 
in using the four requisites allowed to the monk, i.e., robes, food, dwelling, 
and medicine; see sila (4). 


paccaya: ‘condition’, is something on which something else, the so-called 
‘conditioned thing’, is dependent, and without which the latter cannot be. 
Manifold are the ways in which one thing, or one occurrence, may be the 
condition for some other thing, or occurrence. In the Patthana, the last book 
ofthe Abhidhamma Pitaka (comprising six large vols. in the Siamese edition), 
these twenty-four modes of conditionality are enumerated and explained, 
and then applied to all conceivable mental and physical phenomena and 
occurrences, and thus their conditioned nature is demonstrated. 


The first two volumes of the Patthana have been translated into English 
by the Venerable U Narada (Mülapatthana Sayadaw) of Burma, under the 
title Conditional Relations (Published by the Pali Text Society, London 1969, 
1981). For a synopsis of this work, see Guide Ch. VII. 





The twenty-four modes of conditionality are: 


PACCAYA | 119 


(1) Root condition hetu paccaya 
(2) Object " arammana 7 
(3) Predominance 2 adhipati » 
(4) Proximity 2 anantara 2 
(5) Contiguity " samanantara " 
(6) Co-nascence i sahajata " 
(7) Mutuality " afifiamaíifia M 
(8) Support j nissaya " 
(9) Decisive Support d upanissaya " 
(10)  Pre-nascence i purejata " 
(11)  Post-nascence 7 pacchajata j 
(12) Repetition . asevana i 
(13) Karma " kamma ii 
(14) Karma result " vipaka i 
(15)  Nutriment 2 āhāra " 
(16) Faculty " indriya " 
(17) = Jhana à jhana T 
(18) Path i magga ^ 
(19) Association » sampayutta ii 
(20) Dissociation 2 vippayutta " 
(21) Presence i atthi " 
(22) Absence " natthi " 
(23) Disappearance " vigata " 
(24)  Nondisappearance 7 avigata " 


(1) Root-condition (hetu-paccaya) is that condition that resembles the root 
of a tree. Just as a tree rests on its root, and remains alive only as long as its 
root is not destroyed, similarly all karmically wholesome and unwholesome 
mental states are entirely dependent on the simultaneity and presence of 
their respective roots, i.e., of greed (Jobha), hate (dosa), delusion (moha), or 
greedlessness (alobha), hatelessness (adosa), undeludedness (amoha). For 
the definition of these six roots, see müla. 


"The roots are a condition by way of root for the (mental) phenomena 
associated with a root, and for the corporeal phenomena produced thereby 
(e.g. for bodily expression)" (Patth). 


(2) Object-condition (Grammana-paccaya) is called something which, as 
object, forms the condition for consciousness and mental phenomena. 
Thus, the physical object of sight consisting in colour and light (‘light- 
wave’), is the necessary condition and the sine qua non for the arising of 
eye-consciousness (cakkhu-vijifiána), etc.; sound (‘sound wave’) for ear- 
consciousness (sota-vijifiána), etc.; further, any object arising in the mind is 
the condition for mind-consciousness (mano-vififiána). The mind-object may 
be anything whatever, corporeal or mental, past, present or future, real or 
imaginary. 





120 | PACCAYA 


(3) Predominance-condition (adhipati-paccaya) is the term for four things, 
on the preponderance and predominance of which are dependent the 
mental phenomena associated with them, namely: concentrated intention 
(chanda, q.v.), energy (viriya, q.v.), consciousness (citta) and investigation 
(vimamsá). In one and the same state of consciousness, however, only one 
of these four phenomena can be predominant at a time. "Whenever such 
phenomena as consciousness and mental concomitants are arising by 
giving preponderance to one of these four things, then this phenomenon 
is for the other phenomena a condition by way of predominance" (Patth). 
See iddhi-pdda. 


(4—5) Proximity and contiguity (or immediacy) -condition (anantara and 
samanantara-paccaya) — both being identical — refer to any state of 
consciousness and mental phenomena associated with them, which 
are the conditions for the immediately following stage in the process of 
consciousness. For example, in the visual process, eye-consciousness is 
for the immediately following mind-element — performing the function 
of receiving the visible object —a condition by way of contiguity; and so 
is this mind-element for the next following mind-consciousness element, 
performing the function of investigating the object, etc. See vififidna-kicca. 


(6) Co-nascence condition (sahajaáta-paccaya), i.e., condition by way of 
simultaneous arising, is a phenomenon that for another one forms, a 
condition in such a way that, simultaneously with its arising, also the 
other thing must arise. Thus, for instance, in one and the same moment 
each of the four mental groups (feeling, perception, mental formations 
and consciousness) is for the three other groups a condition by way of co- 
nascence or co-arising; or again each of the four physical elements (solid, 
liquid, heat, motion) is such a condition for the other three elements. Only 
at the moment of conception in the mothers womb does corporeality 
(physical base of mind) serve for the four mental groups as a condition by 
way of co-nascence. 


(7) Condition by way of mutuality (afifiamafifia-paccaya). All the just 
mentioned associated and co-nascent mental phenomena, as well as the 
four physical elements, are, of course, at the same time also conditioned by 
way of mutuality, “just like three sticks propped up one by another.” The four 
mental groups are one for another a condition by way of mutuality. So also 
are the four elements, and also mentality and corporeality at the moment of 
conception. 


(8) Support-condition (nissaya-paccaya). This condition refers either to 
a pre-nascent (see 10) or co-nascent (see 6) phenomenon which is aiding 
other phenomena in the manner of a foundation or base, just as the trees 
have the earth as their foundation, or as the oil-painting rests on the 
canvas. In this way, the five sense organs and the physical base of the mind 
are for the corresponding six kinds of consciousness a pre-nascent, i.e., 
previously arisen, condition by way of support. Further all co-nascent (see 
6) phenomena are mutually (see 7) conditioned by each other by way of 
support. 





PACCAYA | 121 


(9) Decisive-support (or inducement) condition (upanissaya-paccaya) is 
threefold, namely (a) by way of object (Grammanipanissaya-paccaya), 
(b) by way of proximity (anantariipanissaya), (c) natural decisive support 
(pakatiupanissaya). These conditions act as strong inducement or cogent 
reason. 


(a) Anything past, present or future, corporeal or mental, real or imaginary, 
may, as object of our thinking, become a decisive support, or strong 
inducement, to moral, immoral or karmically neutral states of mind. 


Evil things, by wrong thinking about them, become an inducement to 
immoral life; by right thinking, an inducement to moral life. But good 
things may be an inducement not only to similarly good things, but also to 
bad things, such as self-conceit, vanity, envy, etc. 


(b) is identical with proximity condition (No. 4). 


(c) Faith, virtue, etc., produced in one’s own mind, or the influence of climate, 
food, etc., on one’s body and mind, may act as natural and decisive support- 
conditions. Faith may be a direct and natural inducement to charity, virtue 
to mental training, etc.; greed to theft, hate to murder; unsuitable food and 
climate to ill-health; friends to spiritual progress or deterioration. 


(10) Pre-nascence-condition (purejata-paccaya) refers to something 
previously arisen, which forms a base for something arising later on. For 
example, the five physical sense organs and the physical base of mind, having 
already arisen at the time of birth, form the condition for the consciousness 
arising later, and for the mental phenomena associated therewith. 


(11) Post-nascence-condition (pacchdjata-paccaya) refers to consciousness 
and the phenomena therewith associated, because they are — just as is 
the feeling of hunger— a necessary condition for the preservation of this 
already arisen body. 


(12) Repetition-condition (Gsevana-paccaya) refers to the karmic 
consciousness, in which each time the preceding impulsive moments 
(javana-citta, q.v.) are for all the succeeding ones a condition by way of 
repetition and frequency, just as in learning by heart, through constant 
repetition, the later recitation becomes gradually easier and easier. 


(13) Karma-condition (kamma-paccaya). The prenatal karma (i.e., karma- 
volitions, kamma-cetand, in a previous birth) is the generating condition 
(cause) of the five sense organs, the fivefold sense-consciousness, and the 
other karma-produced mental and corporeal phenomena in a later birth. 
Karmic volition is also a condition by way of karma for the co-nascent mental 
phenomena associated therewith, but these phenomena are in no way 
karma results. 


(14) Karmaresult-condition (vipaka-paccaya). The karma resultant five kinds 
of sense-consciousness are a condition by way of karma result for the co- 
nascent mental and corporeal phenomena. 


(15)Nutriment-condition (ahára-paccaya). For the fournutriments, see ahara. 
(16) Faculty-condition (indriya-paccaya). This condition applies to twenty 





122 | PACCAYA 


faculties (indriya, q.v.), leaving out No. 7 and 8 from the twenty-two 
faculties. Of these twenty faculties, the five physical sense organs (1 to 5), in 
their capacity as faculties, form a condition only for incorporeal phenomena 
(eye-consciousness etc.); physical vitality (9) and all the remaining faculties, 
form a condition for the co-nascent mental and corporeal phenomena. 


(17) Jhana-condition (jhdna-paccaya) is a term for the seven so-called 
jhana-factors, as these form a condition to the co-nascent mental and 
corporeal phenomena, to wit: (1) thought-conception (vitakka), (2) 
discursive thinking (vicdra), (3) interest (piti), (4) joy (sukha), (5) sadness 
(domanassa), (6) indifference (upekkha), (7) concentration (samādhi). (For 
definition see Pali terms.) 


1, 2, 3, 4, 7 are found in four classes of greedy consciousness (see Table 
I, 22-25); 1, 2, 5, 7 in hateful consciousness (ibid. 30, 31); 1, 2, 6, 7 in the 
classes of deluded consciousness (ibid. 32, 33). This condition does not 
only apply to jhana, but also to the general intensifying (‘absorbing’) impact 
of these seven factors. 


(18) Path-condition (magga-paccaya) refers to the twelve path-factors, 
as these are for the karmically wholesome and unwholesome mental 
phenomena associated with them, a way of escape from this or that 
mental constitution, namely: (1) knowledge (pafifía = samma-ditthi, right 
understanding), (2) (right or wrong) thought-conception (vitakka), (3) right 
speech (sammd-vdaca), (4) right bodily action (samma-kammanta), (5) right 
livelihood (sammd-djiva), (6) (right or wrong) energy (viriya), (7) (right or 
wrong) mindfulness (sati), (8) (right or wrong) concentration (samādhi), 
(9) wrong views (micchà-ditthi), (10) wrong speech (miccha-vaca), (11) 
wrong bodily action (miccha-kammanta), (12) wrong livelihood (micchda- 
Gjiva). See magga. 

(19) Association-condition (sampayutta-paccaya) refers to the co-nascent 
(see 6) and mutually (see 7) conditioned four mental groups (khandha), 
"as they aid each other by their being associated, by having a common 
physical base, a common object, and by their arising and disappearing 
simultaneously" (Patth Com). 


(20) Dissociation-condition (vippayutta-paccaya) refers to such phenomena 
as aid other phenomena by not having the same physical base (eye, etc.) 
and objects. Thus corporeal phenomena are for mental phenomena, and 
conversely, a condition by way of dissociation, whether co-nascent or not. 


(21) Presence-condition (atthi-paccaya) refers to a phenomenon being pre- 
nascent or co-nascent, which through its presence is a condition for other 
phenomena. This condition applies to the conditions Nos. 6, 7, 8, 10, 11. 


(22) Absence-condition (natthi-paccaya) refers to consciousness, etc., which 
has just passed, and which thus forms the necessary condition for the 
immediately following stage of consciousness by giving it an opportunity 
to arise. See No. 4. 


(23) Disappearance-condition (vigata-paccaya) is identical with No. 22. 


(24) Non-disappearance-condition (avigata-paccaya) is identical with 
No. 21. 





PACCAYA | 123 


These twenty-four conditions should be known thoroughly for a detailed 
understanding of that famous formula of dependent origination (paticca- 
samuppáda, q.v.). See Fund Ch. III, Guide Ch. VII. 


See The Significance of Dependent Origination, by Nyanatiloka (Wheel 140). 


Source note: This term occurs often in the old Sutta texts in 

such expressions as ko hetu, ko paccayo, yam yad eva paccayam 
paticca uppajjati vififiaánam, etc., or as ablatival adverb in avijjà 
paccayà sankhara. All the twenty-four paccaya are for the first time 
enumerated, explained and applied to the phenomena of existence 

in the Patthana of the Abhidhamma Canon. Of these twenty-four 
paccaya, five are already mentioned in Patis (II, 49-54, 59ff., 72-77), 
namely, sahajáta-paccaya, afifíamafifia-paccaya, nissaya-paccaya, 
sampayutta-paccaya, vippayutta-paccaya 


(1) Hetu is already used in the Sutta texts as ‘condition’ in a general 
and indefinite way, as a synonym of paccaya. In the sense of kusala 
and akusala roots (müla; see MN 9), however, it is only found in the 
Abhidhamma Canon and Commentaries. 


(2) Arammana has in the Sutta texts only the meaning of ‘foundation’, 
or ‘basis’, or ‘dependent on’, e.g. MN 21: tadarammanaiica sabbalokam 
mettasahagatena cetasa pharitvà... or DN 33; SN 22.53: vififianam... 
rüpárammanam... vedandrammanam... As term for the six objects, 
rüpárammana, saddarammana, etc., it is first used in the Abhidhamma 
Canon, though the teaching of dependency of the six kinds of vififiana 
on the six sense-objects is an integral part of the Suttas. See e.g. 


sadde ca... etc. 


(3) Adhipati, as a philosophical term, occurs for the first time in the 
Abhidhamma Canon (esp. Patth). The four adhipati are in the Suttas 
called iddhipàda (e.g. SN 51:11).IntheoldSuttatexts, three adhipateyya 
are however mentioned: atta-, loka-, dhamma- (AN 3:38). 


(4) &(5) Anantara- and samanantara-paccaya occur, as paccaya, for 
the first time in the Abhidhamma Canon (esp. Patth). In a veiled form, 
however, we find the first term in the old Sutta texts (e.g. Ratana Sutta 
in Khp and Sn): samadhim-anantarikafifíiamáhu: the concentration 
(associated with the arahatta-magga), which is called the *immediate* 
condition (for arahatta-phala). 


(6) & (7) Sahajata and afifiamafifia-paccaya. Though these terms, as 
such, are not found in the older Sutta texts, still the teaching of the 
co-nascent and mutual conditionedness of the four mental groups 
(vedanà, safifià, sankhara, vififiana) is taught in the old texts, e.g. MN 28, 
43; SN 22, etc. 


(8) Nissaya-paccaya is mentioned in Patis; see first paragraph of these 
notes, above. 





124 | PACCAY A-SANNISSITA-SILA 


(9) Upanissaya-paccaya. Though this term is not found in the Suttas, 
the teaching expressed thereby is, however, frequently met with there, 
sometimes even in the form of upanisda (apparently a contraction of 
upanissaya), e.g. SN 12:23: Yam pi'ssa tam bhikkhave khayasmim 
khaye fianam, tam sa-upanisam vadāmi, no anupanisam. The terms 
pakati-, drammana- and anantara-upanissaya are later developments 
of the Abhidhamma Commentaries. 


Alltheremaining terms are met with only inthe Abhidhamma literature 
though the substance is, perhaps in all cases, already dealt with in the 
old Sutta texts. 


paccaya-sannissita-sila: ‘morality consisting in the wise use of the monk’s 
requisites’; see sila (4). 


pacceka-bodhi: ‘independent enlightenment’; see pacceka-buddha and 
bodhi. 


pacceka-buddha: an ‘Independently Enlightened One’; or Separately or 
Individually (= pacceka) Enlightened One (renderings by ‘Silent’ or ‘Private 
Buddha’ are not very apt). This is a term for an arahat (see ariya-puggala) 
who has realised Nibbana without having heard a Buddha's doctrine from 
others. He comprehends the Four Noble Truths individually (pacceka), 
independent of any teacher, by his own effort. He has, however, not the 
capacity to proclaim the Teaching effectively to others, and therefore does 
not become a ‘Teacher of gods and men’, a Perfect or Universal Buddha 
(sammd-sambuddha). pacceka-buddhas are described as frugal of speech, 
cherishing solitude. According to tradition, they do not arise while the 
teaching of a Perfect Buddha is known; but for achieving their rank after 
many aeons of effort, they have to utter an aspiration before a Perfect 
Buddha. 


Canonical references are few; Pug 29 (definition); AN 2:56; in MN 116 names 
of many pacceka-buddhas are given; in DN 16 they are said to be worthy of 
a thiipa (dagoba); the Treasure Store Sutta (Nidhikanda Sutta, Khp) mentions 
pacceka-bodhi; Nidd II ascribes to individual pacceka-buddhas the verses of 
the Rhinoceros Sutta (Khaggavisana Sutta, Sn). See bodhi. 


See The Paccekabuddha, by Ria Kloppenborg (Wheel 305/307). 


pacchajata-paccaya: ‘post-nascence-condition’, is one of the twenty-four 
conditions (paccaya, q.v.). 


padakajjhana: ‘foundation-forming absorption’, is an absorption used as a 
foundation, or starting point, for the higher spiritual powers (abhififia, q.v.), 
or for insight (vipassand, q.v.), leading to the supermundane paths (see ariya- 
puggala). The foundation for the former is the fourth absorption; for insight, 
however, any absorption is suitable. For details, see samatha-vipassanda. 


Source note: This term is not found in the Tipitaka, but is often used 
in the exegetical literature. The idea, however, expressed thereby, is 


PAGUNNATA | 125 





implied in many places of the old Sutta texts, e.g., AN 9:36, where it 
is shown how the jhdnas, one after the other, may serve as basis, or 
foundation (as mental object), for vipassand. In many of the old Sutta 
texts itis also shown how the fourth jhàna forms the foundation for the 
attainment of the five higher spiritual powers (abhififia). 


pada-parama: ‘one for whom the words are the utmost attainment’. “Whoever, 
though having learned much, speaking much, knowing many things by 
heart, and discoursing much, has not penetrated the truth, such a man is 
called by that name” (Pug 163). 


padhana: ‘effort.’ The four right efforts (samma-padhana), forming the 
sixth stage of the Eightfold Path (i.e., sammd-vdyama, see magga) are: (1) 
the effort to avoid (samvara-padhana), (2) to overcome (pahana-padhana), 
(3) to develop (bhdvand-padhana), (4) to maintain (anurakkhana- 
padhana); i.e., (1) the effort to avoid unwholesome (akusala) states, such 
as evil thoughts, etc., (2) to overcome unwholesome states, (3) to develop 
wholesome (kusala) states, such as the seven elements of enlightenment 
(bojjhanga, q.v.), (4) to maintain the wholesome states. 


"The monk rouses his will to avoid the arising of evil, unwholesome things 
not yet arisen... to overcome them... to develop wholesome things not yet 
arisen... to maintain them, and not to let them disappear, but to bring them 
to growth, to maturity and to the full perfection of development. And he 
makes effort, stirs up his energy, exerts his mind and strives" (AN 4:13). 


(1) “What now, O monks, is the effort to avoid? Perceiving a form, or a sound, 
or an odour, or a taste, or a bodily or mental impression, the monk neither 
adheres to the whole nor to its parts. And he strives to ward off that through 
which evil and unwholesome things might arise, such as greed and sorrow, 
if he remained with unguarded senses; and he watches over his senses, 
restrains his senses. This is called the effort to avoid. 


(2) “What now is the effort to overcome? The monk does not retain any 
thought of sensual lust, or any other evil, unwholesome states that may 
have arisen; he abandons them, dispels them, destroys them, causes them 
to disappear. This is called the effort to overcome. 


(3) “What now is the effort to develop? The monk develops the factors of 
enlightenment, bent on solitude, on detachment, on extinction, and ending 
in deliverance, namely: mindfulness (sati), investigation of the law (dhamma- 
vicaya), energy (viriya), rapture (piti), tranquillity (passaddhi), concentration 
(samadhi), equanimity (upekkhd). This is called the effort to develop. 

(4) “What now is the effort to maintain? The monk keeps firmly in his mind a 
favourable object of concentration, such as the mental image of a skeleton, 
a corpse infested by worms, a corpse blue-black in colour, a festering corpse, 
a corpse riddled with holes, a corpse swollen up. This is called the effort to 
maintain" IV, 14). 


padhaniyanga: ‘elements of effort’, are the following five qualities: faith, 
health, sincerity, energy, and wisdom (MN 85, 90; AN 5:53). See parisuddhi- 
padhaàniyanga. 


pagufifiata: ‘proficiency’, namely, of mental concomitants (kaya-paguíifiatà), 





126 | PAHANA 


and of consciousness (cittapaguiifiatáà), are two mental phenomena 
associated with all wholesome consciousness. See Table II. 


Source note: First found in the Dhammasangani of the Abhidhamma 
Canon; see lahutd. 


pahana: ‘overcoming’, abandoning. There are five kinds of overcoming: 
(1) overcoming by repression (vikkhambhana-pahdna), i.e., the temporary 
suspension of the five hindrances (nivarana, q.v.) during the absorptions; 
(2) overcoming by the opposite (tadanga-pahdna); (3) overcoming by 
destruction (samuccheda-pahána); (4) overcoming by tranquillisation 
(patipassaddhi-pahana); (5) overcoming by escape (nissarana-pahdana). 
(1) "Among these, ‘overcoming by repression’ is the pushing back of adverse 
things, such as the five mental hindrances (nivarana, q.v.), etc., through this 
or that mental concentration (samadhi, q.v.), just as a pot thrown into moss- 
clad water pushes the moss aside... 


(2) “Overcoming by the opposite’ is the overcoming by opposing this or that 
thing that is to be overcome, by this or that factor of knowledge belonging 
to insight (vipassana q.v.), just as a lighted lamp dispels the darkness of 
the night. In this way, the personality-belief (sakkaya-ditthi, see ditthi) is 
overcome by determining the mental and corporeal phenomena... the view 
of uncausedness of existence by investigation into the conditions... the idea 
of eternity by contemplation of impermanence... the idea of happiness by 
contemplation of misery... 

(3) "If through the knowledge of the noble path (see ariya-puggala) the 
fetters and other evil things cannot continue any longer, just like a tree 
destroyed by lightning, then such an overcoming is called 'overcoming by 
destruction” (Vism XXII, 110ff.). 


(4) When, after the disappearing of the fetters at the entrance into the paths, 
the fetters, from the moment of fruition (phala) onwards, are forever extinct 
and stilled, such overcoming is called the 'overcoming by tranquillisation'. 


(5) “The ‘overcoming by escape’ is identical with the extinction and Nibbana” 
(Patis I. 27). 


Source note: The five terms, as vikkhambhana, etc., are, as such, not 
found in the old Sutta texts, but they are enumerated and explained 
already in the Patisambhidamagga (II. 179ff.). 


pahana-parififia: see parinna. 
pain, feeling of: see vedand. 


pakati-sila: ‘natural or genuine morality’, is distinct from those outward rules 
of conduct laid down for either laymen or monks. Those later are the so- 
called ‘prescribed morality’ (paiifiatti-sila). See sila. 


pakati-upanissaya: direct inducement’; see paccaya. 


palibodha: ‘obstacles’, is the term for the following things if they obstruct the 





PANNA | 127 


monk in the strict practice of a subject of meditation: a crowded monastery, 
travelling, relatives, association with lay folk, gifts, pupils, repairs in the 
monastery, sickness, study, magical power. The latter, however, may become 
an obstacle only in developing insight (vipassand, q.v.). See Vism III, 29ff. 


Source note: This tenfold group is first found in the Commentaries and 
is explained in Vism III. 


pamsuktlik’anga: the ‘vow to wear only robes made from picked-up rags’, is 
one of the ascetic rules of purification; see dhutanga. 


panatipata veramani: ‘abstaining from the killing of living beings’, is the first 
of the five moral rules binding upon all Buddhists; see sikkhàá-pada. 


paficadvaravajjana: ‘advertence to the five sense-doors’; see vi/ifiána-kicca. 
Source note: First found in the commentaries. See Gvajjana. 
paífíca-sila: see sikkhd-pada. 


pafíca-vokara-bhava: ‘five-group existence’, is a term for existence in the 
sensuous sphere (kamavacara), or in the fine-material sphere (rüpavacara, 
see avacara), since all the five groups of existence (khandha, q.v.) are found 
there. In the immaterial sphere (arüpávacara, see avacara), however, only 
the four mental groups are found, and in the world of unconscious beings 
(asafifia-satta, q.v.) only the one corporeality group. See ekavokara-bhava 
and catu-pafíca-vokára-bhava; further see avacara. See vokara. 


pafiha-byakarana: ‘answering questions’. “There are, O monks, four ways 
of answering questions: there are questions requiring a direct answer; 
questions requiring an explanation; questions to be answered by counter- 
questions; questions to be rejected (as wrongly put).” See DN 33; AN 3:68; 
AN 4:42. 


pafifia: ‘understanding’, ‘knowledge’, ‘wisdom’, ‘insight’, comprises a 
very wide field. The specific Buddhist knowledge or wisdom, however, 
as part of the Noble Eightfold Path (magga, q.v.) to deliverance, is insight 
(vipassaná, q.v.), i.e., that intuitive knowledge which brings about the four 
stages of holiness and the realisation of Nibbana (see ariya-puggala), and 
which consists in the penetration of the impermanence (anicca, q.v.), misery 
(dukkha, see sacca) and impersonality (anattà) of all forms of existence. 
Further details, see under tilakkhana. 


With regard to the condition of its arising one distinguishes three kinds of 
knowledge: knowledge based on thinking (cinta-mayàa-pafifia), knowledge 
based on learning (suta-maya-paiilia) knowledge based on mental 
development (bhavanàa-maya-pafiiia) (DN 33). 


“Based on thinking’ is that knowledge which one has acquired through 
one’s own thinking, without having learnt it from others. ‘Based on learning’ 
is that knowledge which one has heard from others and thus acquired 
through learning. “Based on mental development’ is that knowledge which 
one has acquired through mental development in this or that way, and which 
has reached the stage of full concentration” (appaná, q.v.) (Vism XIV). 





128 | PANNATTI-SILA 


Wisdom is one of the five mental faculties (see bala), one of the three kinds 
of training (sikkhd, q.v.), and one of the perfections (see pdrami). For further 
details, see vipassand, and the detailed exposition in Vism XIV, 1-32. 


pafifiatti-sila: ‘prescribed morality’, is a term for the disciplinary rules of the 
monk or layman prescribed by the Buddha, as distinguished from natural or 
genuine morality (pakati-sila; see sila). 


pafifia-vimutti: ‘deliverance through wisdom (or ‘understanding’ ), signifies, 
according to Commentary to AN 5:142, the wisdom associated with the 
fruition of holiness (arahatta-phala). In Pug 31 and similarly in MN 70, it is 
said: “A monk may not have reached in his own person the eight liberations 
(= jhdna, q.v.), but through his wisdom the cankers have come to extinction 
in him. Such a person is called wisdom-liberated" (pafifia-vimutta). Com 
to Pug: *He may be one of five persons: either a practiser of bare insight 
(sukkhavipassako, q.v.), or one who has attained to holiness after rising from 
one of the absorptions." See SN 12:70. 


The term is often linked with ceto-vimutti (q.v.), deliverance of mind'. 


papafica (Skr prapajica): in doctrinal usage, it signifies the expansion, 
differentiation, *diffuseness or 'manifoldness of the world; and it may 
also refer to the ‘phenomenal world’ in general, and to the mental attitude 
of ‘worldliness’. In AN 4:173, it is said: “As far as the field of sixfold 
sense-impression extends, so far reaches the world of diffuseness (or the 
phenomenal world; papaficassa gati), as far as the world of diffuseness 
extends, so far extends the field of sixfold sense-impression. Through the 
complete fading away and cessation of the field of sixfold sense-impression, 
there comes about the cessation and the coming-to-rest of the world of 
diffuseness (papafica-nirodho papaiica-vüpasamo)." 


The opposite term nippapafica is a term for Nibbana (SN 53), in the sense 
of ‘freedom from samsaric diffuseness'. Dhp 254: “Mankind delights in the 
diffuseness of the world, the Perfect Ones are free from such diffuseness" 
(papaficabhiratà pajà, nippapaficà tathágata). The eighth of the ‘thoughts 
of a great man’ (maha-purisa-vitakka; AN 8:30) has: “This Dhamma is 
for one who delights in non-diffuseness (the unworldly, Nibbana); it is not 
for him who delights in worldliness (papafica)." For the psychological 
sense of ‘differentiation’, see MN 18 (Madhupindika Sutta): “Whatever 
man conceives (vitakketi) that he differentiates (papajiceti); and what he 
differentiates, by reason thereof ideas and considerations of differentiation 
(papafica-safifía-sankha) arise in him." 

On this text and the term papajica, see Dr. Kurt Schmidt in German Buddhist 
Writers (Wheel 74/75) pp. 61ff. See DN 21 (Sakka’s Quest; Wheel 10). 
The commentaries often mention a threefold classification, tanha-, ditthi-, 
mana-papafica, which probably means the world's diffuseness created by 
craving, falseviews,andconceit. See MN 123; AN4:173; AN6:14,Sn530,874, 
916. 


Nanananda Bhikkhu, in Concept and Reality: An Essay on Papañca and 
Papafica-safifia-sankhà (BPS, 1971), suggests that the term refers to man’s 





PARAMATTHA | 129 


“tendency towards proliferation in the realm of concepts” and proposes 
a rendering by “conceptual proliferation,’ which appears convincing in 
psychological context, e.g. in two of the texts quoted above, AN 4:173 and 
MN 18. The threefold classification of papajica, by way of craving, false views 
and conceit, is explained by the author as three aspects, or instances, of the 
foremost of delusive conceptualisations, the ego-concept. 


paramasa: ‘adherence’, ‘attachment’, ‘misapprehension’, is according to 
Vism XXII a name for wrong views; in that sense it occurs in Dhs § 1174ff. 
See silabbata-paramasa. 


paramattha (-sacca, -vacana, -desaná): ‘truth (or term, exposition) that is 
true in the highest (or ultimate) sense’, as contrasted with the ‘conventional 
truth (vohara-sacca), which is also called ‘commonly accepted truth’ 
(sammuti-sacca—Skr samvrti-satya). The Buddha, inexplaining his doctrine, 
sometimes used conventional language and sometimes the philosophical 
mode of expression which is in accordance with undeluded insight into 
reality. In that ultimate sense, existence is a mere process of physical and 
mental phenomena within which, or beyond which, no real ego-entity nor 
any abiding substance can ever be found. Thus, whenever the Suttas speak 
of man, woman or person, or of the rebirth of a being, this must not be taken 
as being valid in the ultimate sense, but as a mere conventional mode of 
speech (vohdra-vacana). 


Itis one of the main characteristics of the Abhidhamma Pitaka, in distinction 
from most of the Sutta Pitaka, that it does not employ conventional language, 
but deals only with ultimates, or realities in the highest sense (paramattha- 
dhamma). But also in the Sutta Pitaka there are many expositions in terms 
of ultimate language (paramattha-desanàá), namely, wherever these texts 
deal with the groups (khandha), elements (dhátu) or sense-bases (ayatana), 
and their components; and wherever the three characteristics (ti-lakkhana, 
q.v.) are applied. The majority of Sutta texts, however, use the conventional 
language, as appropriate in a practical or ethical context, because it “would 
not be right to say that ‘the groups’ (khandha) feel shame, etc.” 


It should be noted, however, that also statements of the Buddha couched 
in conventional language, are called ‘truth’ (vohara-sacca), being correct on 
their own level, which does not contradict the fact that such statements 
ultimately refer to impermanent and impersonal processes. 


The two truths — ultimate and conventional — appear in that form only in 
the commentaries, but are implied in a Sutta-distinction of ‘explicit (or direct) 
meaning (nitattha, q.v.) and ‘implicit meaning (to be inferred)’ (neyyattha). 
Further, the Buddha repeatedly mentioned his reservations when using 
conventional speech, e.g. in DN 9: “These are merely names, expressions, 
turns of speech, designations in common use in the world, which the Perfect 
One (Tathagata) uses without misapprehending them." See also SN 1.25. 


The term paramattha, in the sense here used, occurs in the first paragraph of 
the Kathavatthu, a work of the Abhidhamma Pitaka (see Guide Ch. V), (see 
vohara). 





130 | PARAMI 


The commentarial discussions on these truths (Com to DN 9 and MN 5) have 
not yet been translated in full. On these see K. N. Jayatilleke, Early Buddhist 
Theory of Knowledge (London, 1963), pp. 361 ff. 


In Mahayana, the school has given a prominent place to the teaching of the 
two truths. 


Source note: Not found in this meaning in the oldest parts of the Sutta 
Pitaka. See source note to vohdra-desana. 


parami (also paramita): ‘perfection’. Ten qualities leading to Buddhahood: 
(1) perfection in giving (or liberality; dàna-paramattha), (2) morality 
(sila-paramattha), (3) renunciation (nekkhamma-paramattha), (4) wisdom 
(pafifia-paramattha), (5) energy (viriya-paramattha), (6) patience (or 
forbearance; khanti-paramattha), (7) truthfulness (sacca-paramattha), (8) 
resolution (adhitthàna-paramattha), (9) loving kindness (mettd-paramattha), 
(10) equanimity (upekkha-paramattha). 


These qualities were developed and brought to maturity by the Bodhisatta in 
his past existences, and his way of practising them is illustrated in many of 
the Birth Stories (Jataka), of which, however, only the verses are regarded 
as canonical. Apart from the latter, the ten padrami are mentioned in only two 
other canonical works which are probably apocryphal, the Buddhavamsa 
(in the Story of Sumedha) and the Cariyapitaka. A long and methodical 
exposition of the parami is given in the concluding Miscellaneous Section 
(pakinnakakatha) of the Commentary to the Cariyapitaka. 


In Vism IX it is said that through developing the four sublime states (loving 
kindness, compassion, altruistic joy, equanimity; see brahma-vihàra), one 
may reach these ten perfections, namely: 


"As the Great Beings (mahd-satta; a synonym often found in the Mahayana 
scriptures for Bodhisatta (q.v.), i.e., ‘Enlightenment Being or Being destined 
for Buddhahood) are concerned about the welfare of living beings, not 
tolerating the suffering of beings, wishing long duration to the higher states 
of happiness of beings, and being impartial and just to all beings, therefore: 
(1)Tthey give alms (dàna, q.v.) to all beings so that they may be happy, 
without investigating whether they are worthy or not. (2) By avoiding to 
do them any harm, they observe morality (sila q.v.). (3) In order to bring 
morality to perfection, they train themselves in renunciation (nekkhamma). 
(4) In order to understand clearly what is beneficial and injurious to beings, 
they purify their wisdom (pafifia). (5) For the sake of the welfare and 
happiness of others they constantly exert their energy (viriya). (6) Though 
having become heroes through utmost energy, they are nevertheless full of 
forbearance (khanti) towards the manifold failings of beings. (7) Once they 
have promised to give or do something, they do not break their promise 
(‘truthfulness’; sacca). (8) With unshakeable resolution (adhitthana) they 
work for the weal and welfare of beings. (9) With unshakeable kindness 
(metta) they are helpful to all. (10) By reason of their equanimity (upekkha) 
they do not expect anything in return" (Vism IX, 24). 





PARINNA | 131 


In the Mahayana scriptures, where the pdadrami occupy a much more 
prominent place, a partly differing list of six is given: liberality, morality, 
patience, energy, meditation, and wisdom. 
Literature: Ten Jataka Stories (illustrating the ten pdrami), by I. B. 
Horner (London 1957, Luzac & Co.); The Minor Anthologies of the 
Pali Canon - Part III: Buddhavamsa (Chronicle of Buddhas) and 
Cariyapitaka (Basket of Conduct) translated by I. B. Horner (PTS). 
Narada Thera, The Buddha and His Teachings, Ch. 41, Parami 
(BPS). The treatise on the perfections from the Commentary to 
the Cariyapitaka has been translated in The Discourse on the All- 
Embracing Net of Views (Brahmajala Sutta, with Com), translated by 
Bhikkhu Bodhi (BPS). 


Source note: Only the Commentaries deal with this subject, apart 
from the three apocryphal works, Buddhavamsa, Cariyapitaka, and the 
Jataka. 


Paranimmita-vasavatti-deva: ‘heavenly beings with power over the 
productions of others’, constitute a class of heavenly beings in the sensuous 
sphere (kama-loka). Mara (q.v.) is said to be their ruler. See /oka, deva I. 


parassa ceto-pariya-fíana: ‘penetration of the mind of others’, is one of the 
higher powers (abhififia, q.v.). 


paricchinnakasa-kasina: ‘limited-space kasina = space kasina; see kasina. 


Source note: This term is used in the Commentaries for the term akàása- 
kasina used in the older Sutta texts. 


parihana-dhamma: ‘liable to decline’. “Now, someone reaches the 
attainments (absorptions: jhdna, q.v.) of the fine-material or immaterial 
sphere (see avacara). But he does not reach them according to his wish, 
and not without trouble and exertion; and not according to his wish with 
regard to place, object and duration, does he enter them, or rise therefrom. 
Therefore it is well possible that such a monk, through negligence, may 
lose these attainments. Such a person is said to be liable to decline" (Pug 5). 


parikamma: 'preparatory-moment': see javana. 
parikamma-nimitta: ‘preparatory image’; see nimitta, kasina. 


parikamma-samadhi: ‘preparatory concentration’, is the initial and still 
undeveloped concentration of mind; see samādhi. 


parinibbana: ‘full Nibbana’, is a synonym for Nibbana; this term, therefore, 
does not refer exclusively to the extinction of the five groups of existence 
(khandha) at the death of the holy one, though often applied to it. See 
Nibbana. 


parififia: ‘full understanding’, full comprehension. There are three kinds of 
mundane full understanding (lokiya-parififia), namely: full understanding 
of the known (fdta-parinid), full understanding as investigating 





132 | PARISUDDHI-PADHANIY ANGA 


(tirana-parinnd), and full understanding as overcoming (pahana-parififia). 
In Vism XX, 3 it is said: 

“Full understanding of the known is the knowledge consisting in the 
discernment of the specific characteristics of such and such phenomena, 
as: 'Corporeality has the characteristic of being oppressed; feeling has the 
characteristic of being felt; etc.’ 

“Full understanding by investigating is that insight-wisdom (vipas- 
saná-pafifia; see vipassand), which has the three general characteristics 
(impermanence, suffering, non-self) as its objects, and which arises when 
attributing a general characteristic to (physical and mental) phenomena, as 
for instance: 'Corporeality is impermanent, feeling is impermanent, etc.’ 


“Full understanding by overcoming is that insight-wisdom which has the 
above mentioned general characteristics as its objects, and arises after 
overcoming the idea of permanence, etc." 


parisuddhi-padhaniyanga: the four ‘elements of the effort for purity’ consist 
of effort for purity of morality (sila-párisuddhi-padhüniyanga), for purity of 
mind (citta), of view (ditthi), and of deliverance (vimutti). See AN 4:194. 


Another nine factors are enumerated in DN 34, namely the seven 'stages of 
purification (see visuddhi) and the effort for purity of (higher) knowledge 
(vijja-parififia) and of deliverance (vimutti-parififia). 


parisuddhi-sila: ‘morality consisting in purity’, is fourfold: restraint with 
regard to the monks’ Disciplinary Code, sense restraint, purity of livelihood, 
morality with regard to the monks’ four requisites; for details, see sila. 


parittabha and paritta-subha: two classes of heavenly beings of the fine- 
material sphere; see deva (II). 


pariyatti: ‘learning the doctrine’, the ‘wording of the doctrine’. In the 
progress of the disciple (q.v), three stages may be distinguished: theory, 
practice, realisation, i.e., (1) learning the wording of the doctrine (pariyatti), 
(2) practising it (patipatti), (3) penetrating it (pativedha) and realising its 
goal. See progress of the disciple. 


Source note: On pariyatti, patipatti, pativedha—the first of these 
three fundamental terms, especially in this threefold grouping, 
belongs to the commentarial literature, though the idea expressed 
thereby is often found in the Suttas in such expressions as: dhammam 
pariyapunáàti Suttam geyyam veyydkaranam... The two other terms are 
found separately in the Suttas. 


pasada-rüpa: ‘sensitive corporeality’, is a term for the five physical sense 
organs responding to sense-stimuli. See dyatana. 





PATICCA-SAMUPPADA | 133 


passaddhi-sambojjhanga: ‘tranquillity as a factor of enlightenment’, consists 
in tranquillity of mental factors (kaya-passaddhi) and tranquillity of 
consciousness (citta-passaddhi). See bojjhanga; further Table II. 


patched-up robes, the practice of wearing: is one of the ascetic rules of 
purification (dhutariga, q.v.). 


path and non-path, the knowledge and vision regarding: see visuddhi (V). 


pathavi-dhatu: 'earth-element' or ‘solid element’. It is cognisable through the 
sensations of pressure, touch, cold, heat. pain, etc. About the four elements, 
see dhatu, khandha (I. A). 


pathavi-kasina: 'earth-kasina (see kasina). 


path-condition: magga-paccaya, is one of the twenty-four conditions 
(paccaya, q.v.). 


path-knowledge, the four kinds of: see visuddhi (VII). 
path-result: ‘fruition’: phala (q.v.). 
patibhaga-nimitta: see nimitta, kasina, samadhi. 


patibhana-patisambhida: the ‘analytical knowledge of ready wit, 
see patisambhida. 


paticca-samuppada: ‘dependent origination’, is the doctrine of the 
conditionality of all physical and psychical phenomena, a doctrine which, 
together with that of impersonality (anatta q.v.), forms the indispensable 
condition for the real understanding and realisation of the teaching of 
the Buddha. It shows the conditionality and dependent nature of that 
uninterrupted flux of manifold physical and psychical phenomena of 
existence conventionally called the ego, or man, or animal, etc. 


Whereas the doctrine of impersonality, or anattd, proceeds analytically, 
by splitting existence up into the ultimate constituent parts, into mere 
empty, unsubstantial phenomena or elements, the doctrine of dependent 
origination, on the other hand, proceeds synthetically, by showing that all 
these phenomena are, in some way or other, conditionally related with each 
other. In fact, the entire Abhidhamma Pitaka, as a whole, treats really of 
nothing but just these two doctrines: phenomenality, implying impersonality 
and conditionality of all existence. The former or analytical method is 
applied in Dhammasangani, the first book of the Abhidhamma Pitaka; the 
latter or synthetical method, in Patthana, the last book of the Abhidhamma 
Pitaka. For a synopsis of these two works, see Guide Ch. I and VII. 


Though this subject has been very frequently treated by Western authors, 
by far most of them have completely misunderstood the true meaning and 
purpose of the doctrine of dependent origination, and even the twelve terms 
themselves have often been rendered wrongly. 

The formula of dependent origination runs as follows: 


- Avijja-paccaya sankhàrà: “Through ignorance are conditioned the 





134 | PATICCA-SAMUPPADA 


sankharas,” i.e., the rebirth-producing volitions (cetaná), or ‘karma- 
formations’. 


Sankhàra-paccayáà vilifíánam: “Through the karma formations (in 
the past life) is conditioned consciousness (in the present life).” 


Viffiana-paccayà  nàma-rüpam: “Through consciousness are 
conditioned the mental and physical phenomena (nàma-rüpa)," i.e., 
that which makes up our so-called individual existence. 

- Nàma-rüpa-paccayà salàyatanam: “Through the mental and physical 
phenomena are conditioned the six bases," i.e., the five physical sense 
organs, and consciousness as the sixth. 

- Salayatana-paccaya phasso: “Through the six bases is conditioned the 

(sensorial mental) impression.” 


- Phassa-paccayá vedand: “Through the impression is conditioned 
feeling." 


Vedanà-paccayà tanhda: “Through feeling is conditioned craving.” 


- Tanhá-paccayaupádanam: Through craving is conditioned clinging.” 


Upddana-paccayabhavo: “Throughclinging is conditioned the process 

of becoming,” consisting in the active and the passive life process, i.e., 

the rebirth-producing karma-process (kamma-bhava) and, as its result, 

the rebirth-process (upapatti-bhava). 

- Bhava-paccayà jati: “Through the (rebirth-producing karma-) process 
of becoming is conditioned rebirth.” 

- Játi-paccayá jaramaranam, etc.: “Through rebirth are conditioned old 

age and death (sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief and despair). Thus 

arises this whole mass of suffering again in the future.” 


The following diagram shows the relationship of dependence between 
three successive lives: 





(1) Ignorance (avijjà) Karma-process 


Past |(2) Karma-formations (kamma-bhava) 
(sankhdara) five causes: 1, 2, 8, 9, 10 


(3) Consciousness (vififiana) 





(4) Mind and matter (nàma-rüpa) Rebirth-process 


(5) Six bases (salayatana) (upapatti-bhava) 


(6) Impression (phassa) five results: 3—7 


(7) Feeling (vedana) 


Present 





(8) Craving (tanha) Karma-process 


(kamma-bhava) 


five causes: 1, 2, 8, 9, 10 


(9) Clinging (upadàna) 








(10) Process of becoming (bhava) 








PATICCA-SAMUPPADA | 135 





(11) Rebirth (ati) Rebirth-Process 
Future |(12) Old age and death (upapatti-bhava) 
(jara-marana) five results: 3—7 











Before taking up the study of the following exposition, it is suggested that 
the reader first goes thoroughly through the article on the twenty-four 
conditions (see paccaya). For a thorough understanding of the paticca- 
samuppáda he should know the main modes of conditioning, as decisive 
support, co-nascence, pre-nascence, etc. 


For a closer study of the subject should be consulted: Vism XVII; Fund Ch. 
IIL; Guide Ch. VII and Appendix; Dependent Origination, by Piyadassi Thera 
(Wheel 15); The Significance of Dependent Origination (Wheel 140). 


(1) 
“Through ignorance are conditioned the karma-formations" (avijjd-paccaya 
sankhára),i.e., all wholesome and unwholesome actions (karma, q.v.) of body, 
speech and mind, are conditioned through ignorance. By ‘karma-formations’ 
are meant karmically wholesome and unwholesome volitions (cefand), or vo- 
litional activities, in short karma (q.v., and Fund Ch. II). 


In view of the many misconceptions current in the West, it is necessary to 
repeat here that karma (q.v.), as a technical term, never signifies anything 
but moral or immoral action, i.e., the above mentioned volitional activities, 
or karma-formations, as either causing results in the present life or being the 
causes of future destiny and rebirth. Thus karma, as a philosophical term, 
never means the result of action, as often wrongly conceived by Western 
authors. 


Now, in what way are the karma-formations conditioned through ignorance? 
As concerns the unwholesome karma-formations associated with greed, hate 
or delusion (lobha, dosa, moha), these are always and in all circumstances, 
conditioned through the simultaneous ignorance inseparably associated 
therewith. Thus, ignorance is for the unwholesome karma-formations a 
conditionby way ofco-nascence(sahajáta-paccaya),association(sampayutta- 
paccaya), presence (atthi-paccaya), etc. Ignorance further may be for them a 
condition by way of decisive support or inducement (upanissaya-paccaya), 
if, for instance, ignorance coupled with greed induces a man to commit 
evil deeds, such as killing, stealing, sexual misconduct, etc. In these cases, 
therefore, ignorance is a ‘natural decisive support’ or ‘direct inducement’ 
(pakati-upanissaya-paccaya). It also may become an indirect inducement, by 
way ofobject(arammanüpanissaya-paccaya) of our thinking. Thistakes place, 
if, for example, someone remembers a former state of ignorance combined 
with sensual enjoyment, and in doing so karmically unwholesome states 
spring up, such as sensual desire, grief, etc. 


For the wholesome (kusala) karma-formations, ignorance can only be 
a condition by way of decisive support (upanissaya), never by way of 
co-nascence (sahajáta), etc., since wholesome consciousness at that 





136 | PATICCA-SAMUPPADA 


very moment, of course, cannot be associated with any unwholesome 
phenomenon, such as ignorance. Ignorance is a ‘natural decisive support’ 
or ‘direct inducement’ (pakati-upanissaya), for example, if, induced by 
ignorance and vanity, one exerts oneself to attain the absorptions, and thus 
finally, through perseverance, reaches these wholesome states of mind. 
Ignorance may also be for wholesome karma-formations a ‘decisive support’ 
or ‘inducement by way of object’ (Grammanipanissaya), if, for example, one 
reflects on ignorance as the root of all misery in the world, and thus finally 
attains insight and entrance into one of the four supermundane paths of 
holiness. For ignorance, see avijjà; for karma-formations, see sankhára. 


Q) 

"Through the karma-formations is conditioned consciousness" (sarkhara- 
paccayá vififianam). This proposition teaches that the wholesome and 
unwholesome karma-formations are the causes of future rebirth in an 
appropriate sphere (gati) The karma-formations of the previous life 
condition the budding in a new mother's womb of a fresh psycho-physical 
aggregation of the five groups of existence (see khandha), which here are 
represented by consciousness (vi/ifiána). All such karma resultant (vipáka) 
consciousness, however, such as eye-consciousness (seeing), etc., as well as 
all the mental phenomena associated therewith (feeling, etc.), are karmically 
neutral. It should be understood that already from the very first moment of 
conception in the mother's womb, this karma resultant consciousness of the 
embryonic being is functioning. 


Against Dr. Paul Dahlke's misconception of the paticca-samuppdda as “one 
single karmic moment of personal experience," and of the 'simultaneity' 
of all the twelve links of this formula, I should like to state here distinctly 
that the interpretation of the paticca-samuppada given here as comprising 
three successive lives not only agrees with all the different schools of 
Buddhism and all the ancient commentaries, but also is fully identical with 
the explanations given already in the canonical Suttas. Thus, for example, 
it is said verbatim in Nidana-Samyutta (SN 12:51): “Once ignorance (1) 
and clinging (9) are extinguished, neither karmically meritorious, nor 
demeritorious, nor imperturbable karma-formations (2=10) are produced, 
and thus no consciousness (3=11) will spring up again in a new mother’s 
womb.” And further: “For, if consciousness were not to appear in the 
mother’s womb, would in that case mentality and corporeality (4) arise?” 
See above diagram. 


The purpose of the Buddha in teaching the paticca-samuppdda was to 
show to suffering mankind how, depending on ignorance and delusion, this 
present existence and suffering has come about, and how through extinction 
of ignorance, and of the craving and clinging conditioned thereby, no more 
rebirth will follow, and thus the standstill of the process of existence will 
have been realised and therewith the extinction of all suffering. 


(3) 


“Through consciousness are conditioned corporeality and mentality” 
(vififiana-paccayü nàma-rüpam). This proposition implies that without 





PATICCA-SAMUPPADA | 137 


consciousness there can be no mental and physical process of existence. 
By mentality (nama) is here to be understood the karma resultant (vipdaka) 
mental phenomena, such as feeling (vedand), perception (safifia), volition 
(cetand: non-karmic volition is here meant), consciousness-impression 
(phassa), advertence (manasikara) (MN 9; SN 12:2). For the basic seven 
mental phenomena inseparably associated with every state of consciousness, 
see nama. By corporeality (rapa) is meant the four physical elements (see 
dhátu) and the corporeality dependent thereon (see khandha, I). 


Mentality is always conditioned through consciousness; i.e., consciousness 
(vififiána)isformentality (nàma)aconditionby way ofco-nascence (sahajata), 
mutuality (afifíamafifia), association (sampayutta), etc., since the four mental 
groups at all times form an inseparable unit. 


Consciousness (vififiana) is for corporeality (ripa) a condition by way of 
co-nascence only at the moment of conception, thereafter a condition by way 
of post-nascence (pacchdjata-paccaya; paccaya 11) and nutriment (ahàra), 
i.e., as a support. Just as the repeatedly arising hunger is a condition and 
support for the pre-arisen body, so is the consciousness arising afterwards a 
condition and support for the maintenance of this pre-arisen body. 


(4) 
"Through mentality and corporeality are conditioned the six bases 
(nàma-rüpa paccayá salayatanam). The six bases are a name for the five 
physical sense organs and, as sixth, the mind-base (mandyatana, q.v.), i.e., 
consciousness. 
Mentality (nàma; see 3) is for the five physical bases (ayatana), or sense 
organs, a condition by way of post-nascence. See end of 3. 
Mentality (nama), i.e., feeling, etc., is for the sixth base, or consciousness— 
as being always inseparably associated therewith a condition by way of co- 
nascence, etc. 
Corporeality (ripa), here the four elements, are for the five physical bases 
(ayatana), or sense organs, a condition by way of support (nissaya). 


Corporeality (rüpa), here the five physical sense organs, are for the sixth 
base (ayatana), i.e., consciousness, a condition by way of support and pre- 
nascence (purejata-paccaya). 


(5) 


“Through the six bases is conditioned the (sensorial and mental) impression” 
(salayatana-paccaya phasso), for without the five physical bases, or sense 
organs, there can be no sense-impressions; and without the sixth base, or 
consciousness, there can be no mental impression. 


Thus, the five physical bases, eye, etc., are for the corresponding five 
sense-impressions (visual impression, etc.) a condition by way of support 
(nissaya) and pre-nascence (purejáta), whereas the sixth, the mind-base 
(consciousness), is for the mental impression a condition by way of co- 
nascence, association, mutuality, etc. 





138 | PATICCA-SAMUPPADA 


(6) 
“Through impression is conditioned feeling" (phassa-paccayà vedana), i.e., 
the sensorial and the mental impressions are for the feeling associated 
therewith a condition by way of co-nascence, association, mutuality, etc. 


(7) 
"Throughfeelingisconditionedcraving" (vedana-paccayatanha). Any (karma 
resultant) feeling, whether agreeable, disagreeable or neutral, bodily or 
mental, past or expected, may become for craving a condition of decisive 
support by way ofobject(arammanüpanissaya). Even physically and mentally 
painful feeling may, through the desire to be released therefrom, become for 
craving a condition of decisive support by way of object (arammanupanis- 
saya). 


(8) 

“Through craving is conditioned clinging” (tanhd-paccayad upādānam). 
*Clinging' is explained as an intensified form of craving. It is of four kinds: (1) 
to sensuality, (2) to erroneous views, (3) to rules and ritual, (4) to personality- 
belief. Sensuous craving is to (1) a condition of natural decisive support 
(pakati-upanissaya). For (2-4), craving is a condition by way of co-nascence, 
mutuality, root (Aetu), etc. It also may be a condition of natural decisive 
support. For example, through craving for heavenly rebirth, etc. people 
often may be induced to cling to certain rules and rituals, with the hope of 
reaching thereby the object of their desires. 


(9) 

“Through clinging is conditioned the process of becoming” (upādāna- 
paccayá bhavo), i.e., the wholesome and unwholesome active karma- 
process of becoming (kamma-bhava), as well as the karma resultant (vipáka) 
passive process, the so-called 'rebirth-process' (upapatti-bhava). The karma- 
process (kamma-bhava) comprises the five karmic causes: ignorance, karma 
formations, craving, clinging, karma-process (see 1, 2, 8, 9, 10, of the diagram); 
the rebirth-process (upapatti-bhava) comprises the five karma results (see 3—7 
of the diagram). 


The karma-process is here, correctly speaking, a collective name for generative 
karmic volition (kamma-cetaná) and all the mental phenomena associated 
therewith, while the second link (karma-formations) designates only karmic 
volition (see ayuhana). Both, however, i.e., the second and tenth proposition, 
practically state one and the same thing, namely, that karma is the cause of 
rebirth, as we shall see under 10. 


Clinging (updddana) may be an inducement of decisive support (upanissaya) 
to many kinds of wholesome and unwholesome Karma. Sensuous clinging 
(kamupdadana), i.e., clinging to sensuous objects, for example, may be a direct 
inducement to murder, theft, unlawful intercourse with the other sex, evil words 
and thoughts, etc. Clinging to rules and ritual (silabbatüpadana) may lead to 
self-complacency, fanaticism, cruelty, etc. Clinging is also for the evil karma 
associated therewith, a condition by way of co-nascence, association, etc. 





PATICCA-SAMUPPADA | 139 


(10) 

“Through the process of becoming is conditioned rebirth” (bhava-paccaya 
játi), i.e., through the wholesome and unwholesome karma-process (kamma- 
bhava) is conditioned the rebirth-process (upapatti-bhava). The second and 
tenth propositions, as already pointed out, practically teach one and the 
same thing, namely, that karma is the cause of rebirth; in other words, that 
the karmic volition (cetana) is the seed out of which springs the new life, just 
as from the mango-seed is generated the new mango-tree. 


Hence, the five karmic causes (ignorance, etc.) of the past birth are the 
condition for the karma results of the present birth; and the five karmic 
causes of the present birth are the condition for the five karma results of the 
next birth (see diagram). As it is said in Vism XVII: 


“Five causes were there in the past, 
Five fruits we find in present life; 
Five causes do we now produce, 
Five fruits we reap in future life.” 


Now, just as in this process of continually changing mental and bodily 
phenomena, nothing can be found that would pass from one moment to the 
next moment, so also there is no enduring entity, ego, or personality, within 
this process of existence that would transmigrate from one life to the next 
(see nama-ripa, anattà, patisandhi, khandha). “No being and no living soul 
passed from the former life to this life, and yet this present embryo could 
not have entered into existence without the preceding causes" (Vism XVII). 
“Many things may serve to illustrate this fact, as for example the echo, the 
light of a lamp, the impression of a seal, or the image produced by a mirror" 
(ibid.). 

“Whosoever is in the dark with regard to the conditionally arisen things, and 
does not understand that karma originates from ignorance, etc., he thinks 
that it must be his ego that knows or does not know, acts and causes to 
act, and that arises at rebirth. Or he thinks that the atoms, or a creator, with 
the help of this embryonic process, must have formed this body, or that it is 
the ego endowed with faculties that has impressions, feels, desires, clings, 
continues and enters again into existence in a new birth. Or he thinks that all 
beings have been born through fate, or fortuitously" (Vism XVII). 


Now, on hearing that Buddhism teaches that everything whatever in the 
world is determined by conditions some might come to the conclusion that 
Buddhism teaches some sort of fatalism, and that man has no free will, or 
that will is not free. 


The problem ‘whether man has a free will’ does not exist for the Buddhist, 
since he knows that, apart from these ever-changing mental and physical 
phenomena, no such entity as ‘man’ can be found, and that ‘man’ is merely a 
name not relating to any reality. And the question, ‘whether will is free’, must 
be rejected for the reason that ‘will’, or volition, is a mental phenomenon 
flashing forth only for a moment, and that as such it had not any existence at 
the preceding moment. For of a thing which is not, or is not yet, one cannot, 





140 | PATIENCE 


properly speaking, ask whether it is or is not free. The only admissible 
question would be whether the arising of ‘will’ is independent of conditions, 
or whether it is conditioned. But the same question would equally apply also 
to all the other mental phenomena, as well as to all physical phenomena, in 
other words: to everything and every occurrence whatever. And the answer 
would be: whether will arises, or whether feeling arises, or whether any 
other mental or any physical phenomenon arises, the arising of anything 
whatsoever is dependent on conditions, and without conditions nothing 
ever can arise or enter into existence. 


According to Buddhism, everything mental or physical happens in 
accordance with laws and conditions; and if it were otherwise, chaos and 
blind chance would reign. But such a thing is impossible and contradicts all 
laws of thinking. See Fund Ch. III (end). 


(11) 
“Through rebirth are conditioned old age and death" (jati-paccaya jarā- 
maranam). Without birth there can be no old age and death, no suffering 
and misery. Thus rebirth is to old age and death, etc. a condition by way of 
decisive support (upanissaya). The Buddha has said (DN 15): 


“Profound, Ananda. is this dependent origination, and profound does it 
appear. It is through not understanding, not penetrating, this law that this 
world resembles a tangled ball of thread, a bird’s nest, a thicket of sedge or 
reed, and that man does not escape from the lower states of existence, from 
the course of woe and perdition, suffering from the round of rebirth.” And 
further (MN 28): ‘Whoso understands dependent origination understands 
the Dhamma; and whoso understands the Dhamma understands dependent 
origination." 


patience or forbearance: (khanti) one of the ten perfections (parami, q.v.). 


patigha:(1) Inanethical sense, it means: ‘repugnance’, grudge, resentment, 
anger,andisasynonymofvyapada, ‘ill will (seenivarana) anddosa, ‘hate’ (see 
müla). It is one of the proclivities (anusaya, q.v.). 


(2) ‘(Sense-) reaction’. Applied to fivefold sense cognition, patigha 
occurs in the following contexts: 


(a) as patigha-safifia, ‘perception of sense-reaction’, said to be absent in the 
immaterial absorptions (see jhdna 5). Alternative renderings: resistance- 
perception, reflex-perception; 


(b) as patigha-samphassa, ' (mental) impression caused by fivefold sensorial 
reaction’ (DN 15); see phassa; 

(c) as sappatigha-rüpa, ‘reacting corporeality', and appatigha, ‘not reacting’, 
which is an Abhidhammic classification of corporeality, occurring in Dhs § 
659, 1050. Sappatigha are called the physical sense organs as reacting 
(or responding) to sense stimuli; and also the physical sense-objects as 
impinging (or making an impact) on the sense organs. All other corporeality 
is appatigha, non-reacting and non-impinging. These two terms have been 





PATIPADA | 141 


variously rendered as resistant and not, responding and not, with and 
without impact. 


patihariya: ‘miracle’, marvel. Three marvels are ascribed to the Buddha: 
the marvel of magic (iddhi-pátihariya), the marvel of mind-reading 
(adesanà-pátihariya) and the marvel of instruction (anusdsani-patihariya). 
In DN 11, the Buddha says that he sees danger in the first two and therefore 
abhors them. In AN 3:61, the ‘marvel of instruction’ is called the one ‘more 
noble and sublime’. For iddhi-patihüriya, see DN 25. See also yamaka- 
patihariya. 

patikküula-safifía: see kayagatà-sati. 

patimokkha: ‘disciplinary code’, is the name of the code of monks rules, 
which on all full-moon and new moon days is recited before the assembled 
community of fully ordained monks (bhikkhu). 


See The Patimokkha, Romanised Pali text and translated by Nanamoli Thera 
(Bangkok 1966, Mahamakut Buddhist Bookshop). 


patimokkha-samvara-sila: ‘morality consisting inrestraint with regard to the 
Disciplinary Code’ (see pátimokkha). For details, see sila. 


patinissagganupassana: ‘contemplation on abandonment’, is one of the 
eighteen kinds of insight (vipassana q.v.). Further see the sixteenth exercise 
of ānāpāna-sati (q.v.). 


patipada: (1) ‘Road’, ‘path’; for instance in dukkhanirodha-gamini- 
patipada, ‘the road leading to the extinction of suffering (= the fourth 
Noble Truth); majjhimà patipada, ‘the Middle Way’. 


(2) ‘Progress’ (see also patipadd-idnadassana-visuddhi). There are 
four modes of progress to deliverance: (1) painful progress with slow 
comprehension (dukkhà patipada dandháabhififia), (2) painful progress with 
quick comprehension, (3) pleasant progress with slow comprehension, (4) 
pleasant progress with quick comprehension. In AN 4:162 it is said: 


(1) “Some person possesses by nature excessive greed, excessive hate, 
excessive delusion, and thereby he often feels pain and sorrow; and also 
the five mental faculties, as faith, energy, mindfulness, concentration and 
wisdom (see indriya 15-19) are dull in him; and by reason thereof he 
reaches only slowly the immediacy (anantariya, q.v.) to the cessation of all 
cankers. 


(2) "Some person possesses by nature excessive greed, etc., but the five 
mental faculties are sharp in him and by reason thereof he reaches quickly 
the immediacy to the cessation of all cankers... 

(3) "Some person possesses by nature no excessive greed, etc., but the five 
mental faculties are dull in him, and by reason thereof he reaches slowly the 
immediacy to the cessation of all cankers... 

(4) "Some person possesses by nature no excessive greed, etc., and the 
mental faculties are sharp in him, and by reason thereof he reaches quickly 
the immediacy to the cessation of all cankers..." 


See AN 4:162, 163, 166—169; Dhs § 176ff.; AsTr, 243, 291, 317. 





142 | PATIPADA-NANADASSANA-VISUDDHI 
patipada-fianadassana-visuddhi: ‘purification by knowledge and vision 
of the path-progress' forms the sixth stage of purification (visuddhi, q.v.). 


patipannako: 'path-attainer, is he who had reached one of the four 
supermundane paths of holiness (see ariya-puggala). 


Source note: Occurs first in Pug 17 and Kath 216. 


patipatti: practice, or ‘pursuance’ of the teaching, as distinguished from the 
mere theoretical knowledge of its wording (pariyatti, q.v.). 


Source note: See pariyatti. 


patipassaddhi-pahana: ‘overcoming (of defilements) by tranquillisation’ 
(see pahana). 


patisambhida: ‘analytical knowledge’ or ‘discrimination’, is of four kinds: 
analytical knowledge of the true meaning (attha-patisambhida), of the law 
(dhamma-patisambhida), of language (nirutti-patisambhida), of ready wit 
(patibhana-patisambhida). As an alternative rendering of the fourth term 
(patibhana), Bhikkhu Nanamoli proposes: perspicuity (in expression and 
knowledge). 

“(1) The analytical knowledge of the meaning (attha-patisambhidaà) is 

the knowledge with regard to the sense. 


(2) The analytical knowledge of the law (dhamma-patisambhidà) is the 
knowledge with regard to the law. 


(3) The analytical knowledge of language (nirutti-patisambhida) is the 
knowledge of the language with regard to those former two things. 


(4) Theanalytical knowledge of ready-wit (patibhana-patisambhida) is 
the knowledge about the (former three) kinds of knowledge" (Vibh 
XV). 
“(1) attha (Skr artha, V ar, to reach; result, meaning, purpose, true substance) 
designates, in short, the fruit (phala) of a cause (hetu); for since the fruit of 
a cause results from adhering to the cause, and is reached and effected 
thereby, therefore it is called result (attha). In particular, however, five things 
are considered as attha, namely: everything dependent on conditions, 
Nibbana, the meaning of words, karma result, and functional consciousness. 
When anyone reflects on that meaning any knowledge of his, falling within 
thecategory concerned with meaning (or result), is the 'analytical knowledge" 
of meaning. 


*(Q)dhamma(Skrdharma, dhar,tobear;bearer,condition, law, phenomenon, 
thing) is, in short, a name for condition (paccaya)... In particular, however, 
five things are considered as dhamma, namely: every cause (hetu) producing 
a result, the noble path, the spoken word, the karmically wholesome, 
and the karmically unwholesome. When anyone reflects on that law, any 
knowledge of his, falling within the category concerned with law (or cause), 
is the ‘analytical knowledge’ of the law. 





PATISANDHI | 143 


In the Vibhanga it is further said: ‘The knowledge of suffering is the 
‘analytical knowledge’ of the true meaning (attha-patisambhida), the 
knowledge of its origin is the 'analytical knowledge' of the law (dhamma- 
patisambhida). The knowledge of the cause is the ‘analytical knowledge’ of 
the law (dhamma-patisambhida), the knowledge of the result of the cause 
is the ‘analytical knowledge’ of the true meaning (attha-patisambhida)... 
That the monk knows the law, the Suttas, etc., this is called the ‘analytical 
knowledge’ of the law (dhamma-patisambhida); if, however, he understands 
the meaning of this or that speech... it is called the ‘analytical knowledge’ 
of the true meaning (attha-patisambhidà).* 


(3) “The knowledge of the language concerning those things’ means: the 
language corresponding to reality, and the unfailing mode of expression 
concerning the true meaning and the law. 


(4) "Knowledge about the kinds of knowledges is that knowledge 
which has all knowledges as object and considers them. Or, the analytical 
knowledge of ready wit (patibhdna-patisambhidad) means the knowledge 
of the above mentioned three kinds of knowledges, in all their details, with 
their objects, functions, etc." (Vism XIV). 


On the seven qualities leading to the attainment of the four ‘analytical 
knowledge’, see A VII, 37. See Vism XIV, 21ff; Vibh XV; Patis: 
Patisambhidakatha. 


patisandhi: lit. ‘reunion, relinking, i.e., rebirth, is one of the fourteen 
functions of consciousness (vififidna-kicca, q.v.). It is a karma resultant type of 
consciousness and arises at the moment of conception, i.e., with the forming 
of new life in the mothers womb. Immediately afterwards it sinks into the 
subconscious stream of existence (bhavanga-sota, q.v.), and conditioned thereby 
ever and ever again, corresponding states of subconsciousness arise. Thus it is 
really rebirth-consciousness that determines the latent character of a person. 


"Neither has this (rebirth-) consciousness transmigrated from the previous 
existence to this present existence, nor did it arise without such conditions, 
as karma, karma-formations, propensity, object, etc. That this consciousness 
has not come from the previous existence to this present existence, yet that 
it has come into existence by means of conditions included in the previous 
existence, such as karma (q.v.), etc., this fact may be illustrated by various 
things, such as the echo, the light of a lamp, the impression of a seal, or 
the image produced by a mirror. For just as the resounding of the echo is 
conditioned by a sound, etc., and nowhere a transmigration of sound has 
taken place, just so it is with this consciousness. Further it is said: ‘In this 
continuous process, no sameness and no otherness can be found.’ For if 
there were full identity (between the different stages), then also milk never 
could turn into curd. And if there were a complete otherness, then curd could 
never come from milk... If in acontinuity of existence any karma result takes 
place, then this karma result neither belongs to any other being, nor does it 
come from any other (kamma), because absolute sameness and otherness 
are excluded here" (Vis, XVII 164ff.). 





144 | PATISANDHI 


In the Milindapatiha it is said: 


“Now, Venerable Nagasena, the one who is reborn, is he the same as the one 
who has died, or is he another?" 


“Neither the same, nor another” (na ca so na ca añño). 
“Give me an example." 


“What do you think, O King: are you now, as a grown-up person, the same 
that you had been as a little, young and tender babe?" 


“No, Venerable Sir. Another person was the little, young and tender babe, but 
quite a different person am I now as a grown-up man."... 


*. ..Is perhaps in the first watch of the night one lamp burning, another one in 
the middle watch, and again another one in the last watch?" 


“No, Venerable Sir. The light during the whole night depends on one and the 
same lamp." 


“Just so, O King, is the chain of phenomena linked together. One phenomenon 
arises, another vanishes, yet all are linked together, one after the other, 
without interruption. In this way one reaches the final state of consciousness 
neither as the same person. nor as another person.” 


According to the nature of their rebirth-consciousness, beings divide into 
the following three groups: 


(1) ahetu-patisandhika: a ‘being reborn without root-conditions’, is a being 
whose consciousness at the moment of rebirth was not accompanied by 
any of the three noble root-conditions, viz. greedlessness, hatelessness, 
undeludedness (see miila), i.e., selflessness, kindness, intelligence. Such 
beings are found in the four lower worlds (apdya, q.v.), in which case the 
function of rebirth is exercised by the class of consciousness listed in 
Table I as No. 56. But if such beings are born in the sensuous sphere as 
humans, they will be crippled, blind, deaf, mentally deficient, etc. (Rebirth- 
consciousness = Table I, No. 41.) 

(2) dvihetu (or duhetu)-patisandhika: a ‘being reborn with only two 
(noble) root-conditions’, i.e., greedlessness and hatelessness. (Rebirth- 
consciousness = Table I, Nos. 44, 45, 48 or 49.) 

(3) tihetu-patisandhika: a ‘being reborn with three (noble) root-conditions'. 
Such a being can be found only among men (Rebirth-consciousness = 
Table I, Nos. 42, 43, 46, or 47) and higher heavenly beings. 

On these three types of rebirth, see AsTr 354 - 379. See patisandhika. 

In the Suttas, the terms for rebirth are chiefly punabbhava (q.v.), 
‘renewed existence’, and abhinibbatti ‘arising; or both combined as 
punabbhavabhinibbatti. 


Literature: Vism XVII, 133ff., 164ff., 189ff., 289ff.; Vism XIX, 22ff. 
Karma and Rebirth, by Nyanatiloka Thera (Wheel 9). The Case for 
Rebirth, by Francis Story (Wheel 12/13). Survival and Karma in 
Buddhist Perspective, by K. N. Jayatilleke (Wheel 141/143). Rebirth 
Explained, by V. E Gunaratna (Wheel 167/169). 





PATTI-DANA | 145 


Source note: The term is chiefly commentarial; but it occurs several 
times in one of the later books of the Sutta Pitaka, the Patisambhida- 
Magga (Patis I, 11ff., 52, 59ff.; II, 72ff.). The usual Sutta term for 
‘rebirth’ is punabbhava (*re-becoming ). 


patisandhika: ahetu-patisandhika, dvihetu-patisandhika, and 
tihetu-patisandhika (source note) are purely commentarial terms. For 
patisandhi-citta, see citta-vithi. 


patisankhana-bala and bhavana-bala: ‘power of reflection’, and ‘power of 
mental development’. About these two powers it is said in AN 2:10: 


“What, O monks, is the power of reflection? If, O monks, someone thinks thus: 
“Bad conduct in deeds, words and thoughts verily bears bad fruits both in 
this life, as well as in the next life’, and in consequence of this consideration, 
he abandons bad conduct in deeds, words and thoughts, follows good 
conduct, and keeps his heart pure, this, O monks, is the power of reflection. 


“What, O monks, is the power of mental development? If, O monks, a monk 
develops the factors of enlightenment (bojjhanga, q.v.), bent on solitude, on 
detachment, on extinction, and ending in deliverance, namely: mindfulness, 
investigating of the law, energy, rapture, tranquillity, concentration, and 
equanimity, this, O monks, is the power of mental development.” 


patisankhanupassana-fiana: ‘knowledge consisting in reflective 
contemplation’; is one of the nine knowledges constituting the ‘purification 
by knowledge and vision of the path-progress (patipadà-iianadassana- 
visuddhi; see visuddhi V1), and one of the eighteen chief kinds of insight 
(mahdvipassanda; see vipassana). 


pativedha: ‘penetration’, signifies the realisation of the truth of the Dhamma, 
as distinguished from the mere acquisition of its wording (pariyatti), or the 
practice (patipatti) of it, in other words, realisation as distinguished from 
theory and practice. See pariyatti. 


Source note: See pariyatti. 


patta-pindik’anga: the ‘exercise of the bowl-eater’, is one of the thirteen 
ascetic purification-exercises (dhutariga, q.v.), consisting in the vow of using 
only the alms-bowl for eating, and the rejection of any other vessel. 


patti-dana: lit. ‘giving of the acquired’, i.e., ‘transference of merit.’ Though 
in the older texts very seldom mentioned (e.g. AN 7:50), it is, however, a 
widespread custom in all Buddhist countries. It is presumed that moral merit, 
especially that acquired through giving alms, can be transferred to others, 
apparently for the reason that one’s own good deeds may become to others, 
especially to departed relatives and friends reborn in the ghost realm, an 
inducement to a happy and morally wholesome state of mind. Transference 
of merit is advocated (though without mentioning the term patti-dàna) in 
the Tirokudda Sutta (Khp and Petavatthu) and its Commentary (KhpTTr). It is 
one of the ten ‘bases of meritorious action’ (puiifia-kiriya-vatthu, q.v.), called 
there pattanuppadana. 





146 | PENETRATION 


See “The Doctrine of Reversible Merit" by E L. Woodward. Buddhist 
Review (London), Vol. I (1914), p. 38. 


penetration: see pativedha, pariyatti. For the power of penetrating 
(vipphara) knowledge and concentration, see iddhi. For morality 
combined with penetration (nibbedha), see hdana-bhdgiya-sila, etc. For 
penetration (pariya) of the mind of others, see abhinnd. 


perfections, the ten: pdrami (q.v.). 

perfect one, the: Tathagata (q.v.). 

performance and avoidance: cãritta-vāritta (q.v.). 
permanency, idea of: see vipallasa. 


personality: see sakkáya. For personality-belief, see sakkaya ditthi, ditthi, 
attà, satta, puggala, vipallasa. 


perversions, the four: vipallàsa (q.v.). 
peta (Skr preta): lit. departed spirit’, ghost; see loka. 
petti-visaya: ‘ghost realm’; see loka. 


phala: lit. ‘fruit’. (1) result, effect (often together with hetu, cause); 
(2) benefit (e.g. in Samafifia-phala Sutta, "The Results, or Benefits, of 
Recluseship; DN 2). (3) As 'path-result', or ‘fruition’, it denotes those 
moments of supermundane consciousness which flash forth immediately 
after the moment of path-consciousness (see ariya-puggala) and which, till 
the attainment of the next higher path, may during the practice of insight 
(vipassaná, q.v.) still recur innumerable times. If thus repeated, they are 
called the ‘attainment of fruition (phalasamápatti), which is explained in 
detail in Vism XXIII. 


pharusa vaca: ‘harsh or abusive speech’; see micchd-vdcda. 


phassa (from phusati, to touch): ‘sense-impression’, contact. The term 
samphassa is used in compounds, e.g. in the following: “There are six 
classes of sense-impression: visual impression (cakkhu-samphassa), 
impressions of hearing, smelling, tasting, bodily (tactile) impression and 
mental impression” (MN 9). A twofold division occurs in DN 15: patigha 
(q.v.) -samphassa, ‘impression by sensorial reaction’, and adhivacana- 
samphassa, ‘verbal (or conceptual, i.e., mental) impression’. 


Phassa does not signify physical impact, but is one of the seven constant 
mental concomitants of consciousness (cetasika) and belongs to the group 
of mental formations (sarikhdra-kkhandha). In lists of both these categories 
it is generally mentioned first (e.g. Dhs § 1; MN 9), due to its fundamental 
position in the cognitive process In MN 18 it is thus defined: “Dependent 
on the eye and the forms, eye-consciousness arises; the coming-together 
of the three is sense-impression” (similarly stated in the case of the other 
five senses, including mind). In dependent origination, it is conditioned 





POWERS | 147 


by the six sense-bases and is a conditioning factor of feeling (see paticca- 
samuppáda 5, 6). Its relation to mind-and-body (nàma-riipa) is described in 
DN 15, and its influence on feeling and wrong views, in DN 1 (at the end). It 
is one of the four nutriments (Ghdra, q.v.), and the first factor in the pentad 
of sense-impression (phassa-pancamaka), together with feeling, perception, 
volition and consciousness (see Abh St., p. 47ff.). 


Being a key function in the mind’s contact with the world of objects and 
being a potential source of defilements, sense-impression is an important 
subject for reflective insight contemplation as succinctly formulated in many 
verses of the Sn 736—737, 778, 851, 870-872, 923. 


picked-up rags, wearing robes made from: see dhutanga. 


pindapatik'anga: the ‘practice of going for alms’, is one ofthe thirteen ascetic 
purification-exercises (see dhutanga). 


pisuna vaca: tale-bearing; see musdavada. 
pita-kasina: ‘yellow-kasina’, is one of the kasina exercises; see kasina. 


piti: ‘rapture’, enthusiasm, interest (rendered also as joy, happiness, zest); it 
is one of the mental factors or concomitants (cetasika) and belongs to the 
group of mental formations (sarikhara-kkhandha). Since, in Sutta texts, it is 
often linked in a compound word with ‘gladness’ (pdmojja) or ‘happiness’ 
(sukha), some Western translations have wrongly taken it as a synonym of 
these two terms. Piti, however, is not a feeling or a sensation, and hence 
does not belong to the feeling-group (vedand-kkhandha), but may be 
described psychologically as *joyful interest'. As such it may be associated 
with wholesome as well as with unwholesome and neutral states of 
consciousness. 


A high degree of rapture is characteristic of certain stages in meditative 
concentration, in insight practice (vipassana) as well as in the first two 
absorptions (jhdna, q.v.). In the latter it appears as one of the factors of 
absorption (jhanarga; see jhdna) and is strongest in the second absorption. 
Five degrees of intensity in meditative rapture are described in Vism IV. 
94ff. It is one of the factors of enlightenment (bojjhanga, q.v.). 


planes of existence, the three: see avacara. 
pleasantness, idea of: see vipallasa, subha-nimitta. 
pondering: see vimamsd. 

ponobbhava: alternate spelling of punabbhava (q.v.). 


post-nascence: pacchdjdta-paccaya, one of the twenty-four conditions 
(paccaya, q.v.). 


postures, the four bodily: iriyapatha (q.v.). 


powers, the five spiritual: see bala. For the six higher powers, see abhiññaā. 





148 | PRACTICE 


For the ten powers of a Buddha, see dasabala. For the four roads to powers, 
see iddhipada. For magical powers, see iddhi. 


practice: for theory, practice, and realisation, see pariyatti. 


predominance and pre-nascence: adhipati, purejdta, are two of the twenty- 
four conditions (paccaya, q.v.). 


preparatory concentration (and preparatory image, etc.): see samādhi, 
javana. 


prescribed moral rules: pafifiatti-sila (q.v.). 

proclivities: see anusaya. 

produced corporeality: nipphanna-rüpa (q.v.). 

productive karma (or regenerative productive karma): see karma. 
proficiency (of mental factors and consciousness): paguiifiatà (q.v.). 


progress: see patipadà, abhabbügamana. Progress in morality, etc., 
see hdnabhdgiya, etc. Purification by knowledge and vision of path- 
progress, see visuddhi (V1). See progress of the disciple, below. 


progress of the disciple, gradual development of the Eightfold Path 
in the: in many Suttas an identical passage occurs that outlines the gradual 
course of development in the progress of the disciple. There it is shown 
how this development takes place gradually, and in conformity with laws, 
from the very first hearing of the doctrine, and from germinating faith and 
dim comprehension, up to the final realisation of deliverance. 


"After hearing the law, he is filled with confidence, and he thinks: ‘Full 
of hindrances is household life, a refuse heap; but the homeless life (of 
a monk) is like the open air. Not easy is it, when one lives at home, to 
fulfil in all points the rules of the holy life. How if now I were to cut off 
hair and beard, put on the yellow robe, and go forth from home to the 
homeless life?' And after a short time, having given up his possessions, 
great or little, having forsaken a circle of relations, small or large, he cuts 
off hair and beard, puts on the yellow robe, and goes forth from home to 
the homeless life. 


Having thus left the world, he fulfils the rules of the monks. He avoids 
the killing of living beings and abstains from it; without stick or sword, 
conscientious, full of sympathy, he is desirous of the welfare of all living 
beings. He avoids stealing... avoids unchastity... avoids lying... tale- 
bearing... harsh language... vain talk. 


*He abstains from destroying vegetal germs and plants; eats only at one 
time of the day; keeps aloof from dance, song, music and the visiting of 
shows; rejects floral adornment, perfumes, ointment, as well as any other 
kind of adornment and embellishment. High and gorgeous beds he does 
not use. Gold and silver he does not accept... keeps aloof from buying and 
selling things... 





PÜJA | 149 


“He contents himself with the robe that protects his body, and with the alms- 
bowl with which he keeps himself alive. Wherever he goes, he is provided 
with these two things, just as a winged bird in flying carries its wings along 
with him. 


“By fulfilling this noble domain of morality (sila) he feels in his heart an 
irreproachable happiness.” 


In what follows thereafter it is shown how the disciple watches over his 
five senses and his mind, and by this noble restraint of the senses (indriya- 
samvara) feels in his heart an unblemished happiness; how in all his actions 
he is ever mindful and clearly conscious; and how, being equipped with 
this lofty morality (sila), and with this noble restraint of the senses (indriya- 
samvara), and with mindfulness and clear consciousness (sati-sampajafifia), 
he chooses a secluded dwelling, and freeing his mind from the five 
hindrances (nivarana, q.v.) he reaches full concentration (samādhi, q.v.); and 
how thereafter, by developing insight (vipassana q.v.) with regard to the 
impermanence (anicca), misery (dukkha) and impersonality (anattd, q.v.) of 
all phenomena of existence, he finally realises deliverance from all cankers 
and defilements, and thus the assurance arises in him: 


“Forever am I liberated, 
This is the last time I am born, 
No new existence waits for me." 


See DN 1, 2; MN 27, 38, 51, 60, 76; AN 4:198; 10:99; Pug 239 etc. 
proximity: anantara, is one of the twenty-four conditions (paccaya, q.v.). 


pubbenivasanussati: ‘remembrance of former births’, is one of the higher 
powers (abhinna, q.v.), and a factor of threefold knowledge (tevijjd, q.v.). 


puggala: ‘individual’, ‘person’, as well as the synonyms: personality, 
individuality, being (satta), self (atta), etc., in short all terms designating 
a personal entity, hence also: I, you, he, man, god, etc. All these, according 
to Buddhism, are mere names for certain combinations of material and 
mental processes, and apart from them they have no real existence. They 
are to be considered as mere ‘conventional modes of expression’ (vohdra- 
vacana), and on that level they may be used, and are so used in the Sutta 
texts, if taken “without misapprehending them” (see quote from DN 9 under 
paramattha). With such tacit reservations, the term puggala occurs quite 
frequently in the Suttas. 


In the ultimate sense (paramattha, q.v.), however, there exist only ever- 
changing physical and mental phenomena, flashing up and dying every 
moment. The Kathavatthu, in its first section, discusses the question whether 
“in the absolute sense, any personality (puggala) can be found” (see Guide 
Ch. V § 1). See paramattha, anatta. 


puja: (1) honour, respect, homage, (2) worship, devotional observances, 
devotional offerings; also offerings to monks. 


(1) The Mahamangala Sutta (Sn 259) says that “Honour and respect towards 





150 | PUNABBHAVA 


those worthy of it, is conducive to great blessing” (pūjā ca püjaniyesu etam 
mangalam uttamam). See Dhp 195ff. 


(2) The Buddha did not think much of mere outer worship. “Not thus, Ananda, 
is the Tathagata respected, venerated, esteemed, worshipped and honoured 
in the highest degree. But, Ananda, whatsoever bhikkhu or bhikkhuni, lay 
man or lay woman, abides by the Teaching, lives uprightly in the Teaching, 
walks in the way of the Teaching, it is by him that the Tathagata is respected, 
venerated, esteemed, worshipped and honoured in the highest degree” 
(DN 16). “There are two kinds of worship: in a material way (Gmisa-piija) and 
through (practice of) the Dhamma (dhamma-pijá). The worship through 
(practice of) the Dhamma is the better of the two" (AN 2). 


punabbhava:lit.:re-becoming; ‘renewedexistence’ ,isaSuttatermfor ‘rebirth’, 
which, in later literature mostly is called patisandhi (q.v.). The attainment of 
Sainthood (arahatta), implying the end of future rebirths, is often expressed 
in the words: “This is the last birth. Now there isno more arenewed existence!” 
(natthi' danipunabbhavo) (MN 26; DN 15;Th87,339;Sn502). Thetermis often 
linked with abhinibbatti (‘arising’). 


“But how, O brother, does it come to renewed existence and arising in the 
future (ayatim punabbhavabhinibbatti)? Because beings, obstructed by 
ignorance and fettered by craving, find ever fresh delight now here, now 
there, for this reason there is renewed existence and arising in the future” 
(MN 43). See also SN 11:38. Abhinibbatti also stands sometimes alone in 
signifying ‘rebirth’, e.g. in AN 6:61; 10:65. 

See, in the Second Truth, the adjective ponobhavika, ‘leading to renewed 
existence’. 


See AN 3:76; Sn 163, 273, 514, 733; SN 7:12; 10:3. 


pufifia: ‘merit’, ‘meritorious’, is a popular term for karmically wholesome 
(kusala) action. Opposite terms: apuñña, ‘demerit’; papa, ‘bad’, ‘evil’. The 
value of meritorious action is often stressed, e.g., in the Treasure Store Sutta 
(see KhpTr), Dhp 18, 118, 122. The Community of Holy Monks (ariya- 
sangha), the third Refuge (see ti-sarana), is said to be “the incomparable 
field of merit in the world" (anuttaram pufifiakkhettam lokassa); see anussati 
3. The arahats, however, having transcended all life-affirming and rebirth- 
producing actions, are said to be "beyond merit and demerit"; see Sn 520, 
547, 636, 790. See pufifiabhisankhaàra, pufitia-dhàrà, and pufifia-kiriya- 
vatthu. 


puffiabhisankhara: ‘meritorious karma-formations’ of the sensuous and 
fine-material sphere; see sarkhara I. 1. 


pufifia-dhara: ‘streams of merit’. It is said that one produces four streams of 
merit by offering the four requisites (robes, alms-food, dwelling, medicine) 
to a monk who has reached the conditionless deliverance of mind; further 
by being filled with unshakeable faith in the Buddha, his doctrine and 
community of disciples, and by being perfect in morality (AN 4:51, 52). 
AN 8:39 describes four further streams of merit. 





PUTHUJJANA | 151 


puiifia-kiriya-vatthu: ‘bases of meritorious action’. In the Suttas, three 
are mentioned consisting of giving (liberality; dana-maya-pufifia-kiriya- 
vatthu), of morality (sila-maya-puiifia-kiriya-vatthu) and of mental 
development (meditation; bhavana-maya-pufifia-kiriya-vatthu). See DN 33; 
It 60; explained in AN 8:36. 

Commentaries have a list of ten (dasa puiiia-kiriya-vatthu) which is very 
popular in Buddhist countries: (1)-(3) as above, (4) reverence (apaciti), (5) 
service(veyyávacca), (6)transference of merit (pattanuppadana), (7)rejoicing 
in others’ merit (abbhanumodana), (8) expounding the Doctrine (desana), 
(9) listening to the Doctrine (savana), (10) straightening one's right views 
(rectification of views; ditthujukamma). Explained in AsTr 209ff. 


Literature: See The Advantages of Merit, by Bhikkhu Khantipalo (Bodhi 
Leaves B. 38). 


pure abodes: suddhàvàsa (q.v.). 


purejata-paccaya: ‘pre-nascence’, is one of the twenty-four conditions 
(paccaya, q.v.). 


purification, the seven stages of, see visuddhi. 
purisindriya: ‘virility’; see bhava, khandha. 
purity, the elements of the effort for: parisuddhipadhaniyanga (q.v.). 


puthujjana: lit.: ‘one of the many folk’, ‘worldling’, ordinary man, is any 
layman or monk who is still possessed of all the ten fetters (samyojana, q.v.) 
binding to the round of rebirths, and therefore has not yet reached any of the 
four stages of holiness (see ariya-puggala). 


“Whoso is neither freed from the three fetters (personality-belief, sceptical 
doubt, attachment to mere rule and ritual), nor is on the way to lose these 
three things, such a one is called a worldling” (Pug 9). 


According to the Commentary to MN 9, a *worldling may be (1) an outsider 
(anon-Buddhist) who, if he believed in moral causation, may be said to have 
right view to that extent; but he has not the ‘knowledge conforming to the 
Truths’ (saccanulomika-fiana), as has (2) the *worldling inside the Buddha's 
Dispensation’ (sdsanika). A worldling who professes Buddhism, may be 
either a ‘blind worldling (andha-puthujjana) who has neither knowledge 
of, nor interest in the fundamental teaching (the Truths, groups, etc.); or he 
is a ‘noble worldling (kalyána-puthujjana), who has such knowledge and 
earnestly strives to understand and practise the Teaching. See AsTr 451 
(translated by ‘average man’); Com to MN 1, DN 1. 





152 | QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 


Q 


questions and answers: pa/iha-byakarana (q.v.). 





RADIANT GODS | 153 


R 


radiant gods: abhassara; see deva. 


€ 


raga: ‘lust’, ‘greed’, isa synonym of lobha (see müla), tanha (q.v.) and abhijjha 
(see kamma-patha). For kama-, rüpa-, arüpa-rága, see samyojana. 


raga-carita: the 'ereedy-natured', see carita. 
rapture: piti (q.v.); further see bojjhanga. 
reaction, sense: see patigha. 

ready-wit: see patisambhida. 


reality: see paramattha. Vision and knowledge according to reality: 
see vipassana 15. 


realisation: for theory, practice, and realisation, see pariyatti. 
rebirth: see patisandhi, paticca-samuppada (3, 10), karma, punabbhava. 
receptive consciousness: sampaticchana-citta (see vilifiana-kicca). 
recollections: see anussati. 

red-kasina exercise: see kasina. 

reflecting contemplation: patisankhdnupassand (see vipassand, 17). 
reflection, power of: patisankhüna-bala (q.v.). 

reflex-perceptions: see patigha (2a). 

refuge-formula, the threefold: ti-sarana (q.v.). 

regenerating process: upapatti-bhava (see bhava). 

regenerative karma: janaka-kamma (see karma). 

registering consciousness: tadarammana-citta (see vififíana-kicca). 
relative truth: see puggala, paramattha-sacca, desaná, anattá, satta. 
remembrance, of former existences: see abhinnd 4. 

remorse: kukkucca (q.v.). 


repetition: Gsevana-paccaya, is one of the twenty-four conditions (paccaya, 
q.v.). 


repression, overcoming by: vikkhambhana-pahàna (see pahàna). 
repugnance: patigha (q.v.). 


resistance-perceptions: see patigha (2a). 





154 | RESTLESSNESS 


restlessness: uddhacca (q.v.). 

retrospective knowledge: paccavekkhana-fiana (q.v.). 
reversible merit: patti-dàna (q.v.). 

right (view, right understanding, right speech, etc.): see magga. 


rise and fall (of phenomena): the knowledge consisting in the contemplation 
of rise and fall, see visuddhi VI, 1. 


round of rebirth: see vatta (2), samsdara. The threefold round of rebirth; see 
vatta, 1. 


rukkha-milik’anga: see dhutanga. 
rules and ritual, clinging to mere: (see samyojana, upādāna). 
ruminating-natured: vitakka-carita (see carita). 


rüpa: (1) corporeality (see khandha 1); (2) visual object (see ayatana); (3) fine- 
material (see avacara, jhàna). 


Source note: The terms nipphanna-rüpa and riipa-riipa are used only in 
the Commentaries, although sappatigha and pasada are already found 
in the Abhidhamma Canon (e.g. Dhs $8 585, 597ff.), while upadinna 
occurs repeatedly in the old Sutta texts, e.g. MN 28, apparently with 
the meaning given in the main part of this work. See further upada- 
rüpa. 
rüpajjhana: see jhana. 
ripa-kalapa: ‘corporeal group’, material unit, designates a combination 
of several physical phenomena constituting a temporary unity Thus, 
for instance, the so-called ‘dead matter’ forms the most primitive group, 
consisting only of eight physical phenomena, called the ‘pure eightfold unit 
or ‘octad’ (suddhatthaka-kalàpa), to wit: the four elements (the solid, fluid, 
heat, motion); colour, smell, taste, nutriment (pathavi, àpo, tejo, vàyo; vanna, 
gandha,rasa,oja).InVism,andelsewhere, itisalsocalledojatthamaka-kalapa, 
‘the octad with nutriment as the eighth factor’. 
The simplest form of living matter is the ‘ninefold vitality unit’ or ‘life-ennead’ 
(jivita-navaka-kalapa),formedby adding ‘vitality’ totheoctad. Sevendecades, 
or units of ten (dasaka-kaldpa), are formed by adding to the ninefold unit one 
of the following corporeal phenomena: heart (physical seat of mind), sex, 
eye, ear, nose, tongue or body. See Vism XVIII, 4; Abhidh-s-Tr (PTS), pp. 164, 
250; AsTr 413ff. 


rüpa-kaya: ‘body-group’, as distinguished from nama-kàya, ‘mind-group 
(q.v.). See náma-rüpa. 


rüpakkhandha: ‘corporeality group’, see khandha (1). 


rüpa-loka: ‘fine-material world’, see loka. 





RÜPAYATANA | 155 


rüparammana: ‘visual object’, designates the external of visual physical 
phenomenon (‘light wave’) that forms the base consciousness. See ayatana 


(2). 
rüpa-rüpa: nipphanna-riipa (q.v.). 
rüpavacara: see avacara. 


rüpayatana: see dyatana (2). 





156 | SABBA-LOKE ANABHIRATI-SANNA 


D 


sabba-loke anabhirati-safifia: ‘contemplation on disinterestedness regarding 
the whole world’, described in AN 10:60 in the following words: “Tf, Ananda, 
the monk gives up his tenacious clinging to the world, his firm grasping 
and his biases and inclinations of the mind, and turns away from these 
things, does not cling to them, this, Ananda, is called the contemplation on 
disinterestedness regarding the whole world.” 


sabbüpadhi-patinissagga: see upadhi. 


sacca: ‘truth’. (1) On the ‘two truths, conventional and ultimate, see 
paramattha. 


(2) *TheFourNoble Truths (cattdriariya-saccdani)are the briefest synthesis of 
the entire teachings of Buddhism, since all those manifold doctrines of the 
threefold canon are, without any exception, included therein. They are: the 
truth of suffering, of the origin of suffering, of the extinction of suffering, and 
of the Eightfold Path leading to the extinction of suffering. 


I The first truth, briefly stated, teaches that all forms of existence 
whatsoever are unsatisfactory and subject to suffering (dukkha). 


IL The second truth teaches that all suffering, and all rebirth, is 
produced by craving (tanhd). 


III. The third truth teaches that extinction of craving necessarily results 
in extinction (nirodha) of rebirth and suffering, i.e., Nibbana (q.v.). 


IV. The fourth truth of the Eightfold Path (magga) indicates the means 
by which this extinction is attained. 


The stereotype text frequently recurring in the Sutta Pitaka, runs as follows: 


I. “But what, O monks, is the noble truth of suffering? Birth is suffering, 
decay is suffering, death is suffering; sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief and 
despair are suffering; in short, the five groups of existence connected with 
clinging are suffering (see dukkha, dukkhata). 


II. “But what, O monks, is the noble truth of the origin of suffering? It is that 
craving which gives rise to fresh rebirth and, bound up with lust and greed, 
now here, now there, finds ever fresh delight. It is the sensual craving (kama- 
tanhá),the craving for existence (bhava-tanha), the craving for non-existence 
or self-annihilation (vibhava-tanhda). 


III. “But what, O monks, is the noble truth of the extinction of suffering? It is 
the complete fading away and extinction of this craving, its forsaking and 
giving up, liberation and detachment from it. 


IV."But what, O monks, is the noble truth of the path leading to the extinction 





SACCA | 157 


of suffering? It is the Noble Eightfold Path (ariya-atthangika-magga) that 
leads to the extinction of suffering, namely: 





(1) Right view (samma-ditthi) 
III. Wisdom (pafifia) 
(2) Right thought (samma-sankappa) 





(3) Right speech (sammd-vdaca) 
(4) Right action (sammà-kammanta) I. Morality (sila) 


(5) Right livelihood (sammda-djiva) 





(6) Right effort (sammd-vayama) 
(7) Right mindfulness (samma-sati) II. Concentration (samādhi) 


(8) Right concentration (sammd-samadhi) 





(1) “What now, O monks, is right view (or right understanding)? It is the 
understanding of suffering, of the origin of suffering, of the extinction of 
suffering, and of the path leading to the extinction of suffering. 


(2) “What now, O monks, is right thought? It is a mind free from sensual 
lust, ill will and cruelty. 


(3) “What now, O monks, is right speech? Abstaining from lying, tale- 
bearing, harsh words, and foolish babble (see tiracchüna-katha). 

(4) “What now, O monks, is right action? Abstaining from injuring living 
beings, from stealing and from sexual misconduct (see kamesu micchacara). 


(5) "What now, O monks, is right livelihood? If the noble disciple rejects a 
wrong living, and gains his living by means of right livelihood (see magga, 5). 
(6) “What now, O monks, is right effort? If the disciple rouses his will to 
avoid the arising of evil, demeritorious things that have not yet arisen;... 
if he rouses his will to overcome the evil, demeritorious things that have 
already arisen;... if he rouses his will to produce meritorious things that 
have not yet arisen;... if he rouses his will to maintain the meritorious things 
that have already arisen and not to let them disappear, but to bring them 
to growth, to maturity and to the full perfection of development; he thus 
makes effort, stirs up his energy, exerts his mind and strives (see padhana). 


(7) *What now, O monks, is right mindfulness? If the disciple dwells in 
contemplation of corporeality... of feeling... of mind... of the mind- 
objects, ardent, clearly conscious, and mindful after putting away worldly 
greed and grief (see satipatthana). 

(8) “What now, O monks, is right concentration? If the disciple is detached 
from sensual objects, detached from unwholesome things, and enters into 
the first absorption... the second absorption... the third absorption... the 
fourth absorption" (see jhdna). 


In the Buddhas first sermon, the Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta, it is said 
that the first truth (suffering) is to be fully understood; the second truth 





158 | SACCA 


(craving) to be abandoned; the third truth (Nibbana) to be realised; the 
fourth truth (the path) to be cultivated. 

“The truth of suffering is to be compared with a disease, the truth of the 
origin of suffering with the cause of the disease, the truth of extinction 
of suffering with the cure of the disease, the truth of the path with the 
medicine” (Vism XVI). 

“Tn the ultimate sense, all these four truths are to be considered as empty of 
a self, since there is no feeling agent, no doer, no liberated one. no one who 
follows along the path. Therefore it is said: 


“Mere suffering exists, no sufferer is found. 
The deed is, but no doer of the deed is there. 
Nibbana is, but not the man that enters it. 
The path is, but no traveller on it is seen. 


The first truth and the second truth are empty 

Of permanency, joy, of self and beauty; 

The Deathless Realm is empty of an ego, 

And free from permanency, joy and self, the path.” (Vism XVI) 


It must be pointed out that the first truth does not merely refer to actual 
suffering, i.e., to suffering as feeling, but that it shows that, in consequence 
of the universal law of impermanence, all the phenomena of existence 
whatsoever, even the sublimest states of existence, are subject to change 
and dissolution, and hence are miserable and unsatisfactory; and that thus, 
without exception, they all contain in themselves the germ of suffering. See 
Guide, Ch. VI § 5. 

Regarding the true nature of the path, see magga. 


Literature: Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta (in Wheel 17 and Bodhi 
Leaves); MN 141; Sacca-Samyutta (SN 56); Sacca Vibhanga; WB; 
Vism XVI: The Four Noble Truths, by Francis Story (Wheel 34/35); The 
Significance of the Four Noble Truths, by V. E Gunaratna (Wheel 123). 


sacca-ííana: ‘knowledge of the truth (see sacca), may be of two kinds: (1) 
knowledge consisting in understanding (anubodha-fiana) and (2) knowledge 
consisting in penetration (pativedha-idna), i.e., realisation. See pariyatti. 
“Amongst these, (1) ‘knowledge consisting in understanding is mundane 
(lokiya, q.v.), and its arising with regard to the extinction of suffering, and to 
the path, is due to hearsay etc. (therefore not due to one’s realisation of the 
supermundane path; see ariya-puggala). 


(2) ‘Knowledge consisting in penetration’, however, is supermundane 
(lokuttara), with the extinction of suffering (= Nibbana) as object. It 
penetrates with its functions the four truths (in one and the same moment), 
as it is said (SN 56:30): “Whosoever, O monks, understands suffering, he 
also understands the origin of suffering, the extinction of suffering, and the 
path leading to the extinction of suffering" (Vism XVI, 84). See visuddhi 
(end of article). 





SADDHA | 159 


“Of the mundane kinds of knowledge, however, the knowledge of suffering 
by which (various) prejudices are overcome dispels the personality-belief 
(sakkaya-ditthi, see ditthi). The knowledge of the origin of suffering 
dispels the annihilation-view (uccheda-ditthi, see ditthi); the knowledge 
of extinction of suffering, the eternity-view (sassata-ditthi, see ditthi); 
the knowledge of the path, the view of inefficacy of action (akiriya-ditthi, 
see ditthi)” (Vism XVI, 85). 


saccanulomika-fiana: anuloma-iidna (q.v.), puthujjana. 


sacchikaranrya dhamma: ‘things to be realised’. Recollection of former 
states of existence is to be realised through remembrance (see abhiññā 
4). The vanishing and reappearing of beings is to be realised through the 
divine eye (see abhififia 5). The eight deliverances (vimokkha, q.v.) are to be 
realised through the mental group (kaya, here feeling, perception, mental 
formations; see káya). The extinction of cankers is to be realised through 
insight (vipassana). 


saddha: faith, confidence. A Buddhist is said to have faith if “he believes in 
the Perfect One's (the Buddha's) enlightenment” (MN 53; AN 5:2), or in the 
Three Jewels (see ti-ratana) by taking his refuge in them (see ti-sarana). His 
faith, however, should be “reasoned and rooted in understanding" (akaravati 
saddhà dassanamülika; MN 47), and he is asked to investigate and test the 
object of his faith (MN 47, 95). A Buddhist faith is not in conflict with 
the spirit of inquiry and "doubt about dubitable things" (AN 2:65; SN 
42:13) is admitted and inquiry into them is encouraged. The ‘faculty of 
faith’ (saddhindriya) should be balanced with that of wisdom (pafifündriya; 
see indriya-samatta). It is said: “A monk who has understanding, establishes 
his faith in accordance with that understanding" (SN 48:45). Through 
wisdom and understanding, faith becomes an inner certainty and firm 
conviction based on one’s own experience. 


Faith is called the seed (Sn v. 77) of all wholesome states because, according to 
commentarial explanations, it inspires the mind with confidence (okappana, 
pasáda)anddetermination (adhimokkha), for ‘launching out’ (napakkhandati; 
see MN 122) to cross the flood of samsdra. 


Unshakeable faith is attained on reaching the first stage of holiness, ‘stream- 
entry’ (sotdpatti; see ariya-puggala), when the fetter of sceptical doubt 
(vicikiccha; see samyojana) is eliminated. Unshakeable confidence (avecca- 
pasdda) in the Three Jewels is one of the characteristic qualities of the 
stream-winner (sotdpannassa angani, q.v.). 


Faith is a mental concomitant, present in all karmically wholesome, and 
its corresponding neutral, consciousness (see Table II). It is one of the four 
streams of merit (puññadhārā, q.v.), one of the five spiritual faculties (indriya, 
Q.V.), spiritual powers (bala, q.v.), elements of exertion (padhdniyanga, q.v.) 
and one of the seven treasures (dhana, q.v.). 


See Faith in the Buddhas Teaching, by Soma Thera (Wheel 262). "Does 
Saddha mean Faith?" by Nanamoli Thera (in Wheel 52/53). 





160 | SADDHANUSARI 


saddhanusari and saddha-vimutta: the ‘faith-devoted’ and the ‘faith- 
liberated', are two of the seven kinds of noble disciples (see ariya-puggala, 
B.). 


sagga: ‘heaven’; see deva (heavenly beings). 


sahajata-paccaya: ‘co-nascence’, is one of the twenty-four conditions 
(paccaya, q.v.). 


sahetuka-citta: see hetu. 
sakadagami: the 'once-returner': see ariya-puggala, A. 


Sakka: the ‘King of gods’ (devanam-inda), is the lord over the celestial 
beings in the heaven of the Thirty-Three’ (¢dvatimsa; see deva). 


sakkaya: ‘existing group'. This word is usually translated by ‘personality’, 
but according to the commentaries it corresponds to sat-kaya, ‘existing 
group, hence not to Skr sva-kaya, ‘own group or ‘own body’. In the 
Suttas (e.g. MN 44) it is said to be a name for the five groups of existence 
(khandha): “Sakkaya, O Brother Visakha, is said by the Blessed One to be a 
name for the five ‘groups as objects of clinging’ (upadanakkhandha), to wit: 
corporeality, feeling, perception, mental formations, and consciousness"; 
see sakkaya-ditthi. 


sakkaya-ditthi: ‘personality-belief’, is the first ofthe ten fetters (samyojana). 
It is entirely abandoned only on reaching the path of stream-winning 
(sotapatti-magga; see ariya-puggala). There are twenty kinds of personality- 
belief, which are obtained by applying four types of that belief to each of 
the five groups of existence (khandha, q.v.): (1—5) the belief to be identical 
with corporeality, feeling, perception, mental formations or consciousness; 
(6—10) to be contained in them; (11—15) to be independent of them; (16-20) 
to be the owner of them (MN 44; SN 22.1); see sakkaya, ditthi, upadana 4. 


salayatana: the ‘six bases’ (of mental activity); see dyatana, paticca- 
samuppada. 


samadhi: ‘concentration’; lit. ‘the (mental) state of being firmly fixed’ (sam + 
ā + Y dhà), is the fixing of the mind on a single object. *One-pointedness of 
mind (cittass' ekaggata), Brother Visakha, this is called concentration" (MN 
44). Concentration—though often very weak—is one of the seven mental 
concomitants inseparably associated with all consciousness. See nama, 
cetand. 


Right concentration (samma-samadhi), as the last link of the Eightfold 
Path (see magga), is defined as the four meditative absorptions (jhdna, q.v.). 
In a wider sense, comprising also much weaker states of concentration, 
it is associated with all karmically wholesome (kusala) consciousness. 
Wrong concentration (micchd-samadhi) is concentration associated with 
all karmically unwholesome (akusala, q.v.) consciousness. Wherever in 
the texts this term is not differentiated by ‘right’ or ‘wrong’, there ‘right’ 
concentration is meant. 





SAMANANTARA-PACCAY A | 161 


In concentration one distinguishes three grades of intensity: 


(1) ‘Preparatory concentration’ (parikamma-samádhi) existing at the 
beginning of the mental exercise. 


(2) ‘Neighbourhood concentration’ (upacára-samádhi),i.e., concentra- 
tion ‘approaching’ but not yet attaining the first absorption (jhdna, 
q.V.), which in certain mental exercises is marked by the appearance 
of the so-called ‘counter-image’ (patibhaga-nimitta). 


(3) ‘Attainment concentration’ (appand-samdadhi), i.e., that concentra- 
tion which is present during the absorptions. 


Further details, see bhdvand, Vism III and Fund Ch. IV. 


Concentration connected with the four noble path-moments (magga), 
and fruition-moments (phala), is called supermundane (/okuttara), having 
Nibbana as object. Any other concentration, even that of the sublimest 
absorptions is merely mundane (/okiya, q.v.). 


According to DN 33, the development of concentration (samadhi-bhaávana) 
may procure a fourfold blessing: (1) present happiness through the four 
absorptions; (2) knowledge and vision (/iana-dassana)—here probably 
identical with the ‘divine eye’ (see abhifiíia) through perception of light 
(kasina); (3) mindfulness and clear comprehension through the clear 
knowledge of the arising, persisting and vanishing of feelings, perceptions 
and thoughts; (4) extinction of all cankers (Gsavakkhaya) through 
understanding the arising and passing away of the five groups forming the 


objects of clinging (see khandha). 


Concentration is one of the seven factors of enlightenment (bojjhaviga, q.v.), 
one of the five spiritual faculties and powers (see bala), and the last link of 
the Eightfold Path. In the threefold division of the Eightfold Path (morality, 
concentration and wisdom), it is a collective name for the three last links of 
the path (see sikkhd). 


Source note: — Parikamma-samádhi, | upacára-samaádhi, and 
appanà-samádhi are found only in the Commentaries. 


samadhi-parikkhara: ‘means, or requisites of concentration’, are the four 
foundations of mindfulness (satipatthdna q.v.). See MN 44. 


samadhi-samapatti-kusalata, -thiti-kusalata, -utthana-kusalata: 'skilfulnessin 
entering into concentration, in remaining in it, and in rising from it’. See SN 
34, ff. 


samadhi-sambojjhanga: ‘concentration as a factor of enlightenment’ (see 
bojjhanga). 

samadhi-vipphara iddhi: the ‘power of penetrating concentration’, is one of 
the magical faculties (iddhi, q.v.). 


samanantara-paccaya: ‘contiguity’, is one of the twenty-four conditions 
(paccaya, q.v.). 





162 | SAMANNA-PHALA 


samajfifia-phala: the ‘fruits of monkhood’, is the name of a famous Sutta (DN 
2) and also, according to DN 33, aname for the four supermundane fruitions: 
stream-entry, once-return, non-return, and perfect holiness (see ariya- 


puggala). 


samapatti: ‘attainments’, is a term for the eight absorptions of the fine- 
material and immaterial spheres to which occasionally is added as ninth 
attainment, attainment of extinction (nirodha-samapatti) See jhàna. 


sama-sisi: one ‘who attains two ends simultaneously’, namely: the extinction 
of cankers and the end of life (see Pug 19). In AN 8:6 itis said: “Such is the case 
with a monk who dwells in the contemplation of impermanence of all forms 
of existence, keeping before his eyes their impermanence, perceiving their 
impermanence, perseveringly, steadfastly, undisturbed, of firm mind, wisely 
absorbed; and in whom at one and the same time the extinction of cankers 
and the end of life take place.” 


Source note: In this sense this term is first met with in the 
Puggalapafifiatti while the person indicated is described in the 
Anguttara Nikaya, as discussed above. The term is also found in the 
Patisambhidamagga (Ch. 36) but in a different way, i.e. to denote a 
kind of knowledge called “wisdom concerning the complete cutting 
off and cessation of all dhammas, and their non-reappearance". 


samatha: ‘tranquillity, serenity’, is a synonym of samādhi (concentration), 
cittekaggatà (one-pointedness of mind) and avikkhepa (undistractedness). 
It is one of the mental factors in ‘wholesome consciousness’. See samatha- 
vipassana and bhàvana. 


samatha-vipassana: ‘tranquillity andinsight’ ,areidentical with ‘concentration’ 
(samadhi, q.v.; see samatha) and 'wisdom’ (paññā, q.v.), and form the two 
branches of mental development (bhdvand, q.v.). 


(1) ‘Tranquillity’ is an unperturbed, peaceful and lucid state of mind 
attained by strong mental concentration. Though as a distinct way of 
practice (see samatha-ydnika), it aims at the attainment of the meditative 
absorptions (jhdna, q.v.), a high degree of tranquil concentration (though 
not necessarily that of the absorptions) is indispensable for insight too. 
Tranquillity frees the mind from impurities and inner obstacles, and gives it 
greater penetrative strength. 


“What now is the power of tranquillity (samatha-bala)? It is the one- 
pointedness and non-distraction of the mind due to freedom from desire 
(renunciation)... to freedom from ill will... to the perception of light (see 
dloka-sannd)... to non-distraction... to the defining of phenomena... 
to knowledge, gladness, the eight attainments, the ten kasinas, the ten 
recollections, the nine cemetery contemplations, the thirty-two kinds of 
respiration-mindfulness... the one-pointedness and non-distraction of the 
mind of one contemplating abandonment (relinquishment) while inhaling 
and exhaling (see Gndpdna-sati). 





SAMATHA-YANIKA | 163 


“The power of tranquillity consists of the freedom from perturbation; in 
the first absorption, from the five hindrances (nivarana, q.v.); in the second 
absorption, from thought-conception and discursive thinking;... in the 
sphere of neither-perception-nor-non-perception it consists of the freedom 
from perturbation by the perception of the sphere of nothingness (see 
anupubba-nirodha), which is no longer agitated and irritated by defilements 
associated with restlessness, nor by the groups of existence" (Patis I 97). 


(2) ‘Insight’ (see vipassana) is the penetrative understanding by direct 
meditative experience of the impermanence, unsatisfactoriness and 
impersonality of all material and mental phenomena of existence. It is 
insight that leads to entrance into the supermundane states of holiness and 
to final liberation. 


“What now is the power of insight? It is the contemplation of impermanence 
(aniccadnupassana), of misery (dukkhānupassanā), impersonality (anattà- 
nupassaná), of aversion (nibbidanupassana), detachment (virāgānupassanā), 
extinction (nirodha), abandonment (patinissagga), with regard to corpore- 
ality, feeling, perception, mental formations and consciousness...That in 
contemplating the impermanence one is no more agitated by the idea of 
grasping... no more by ignorance and the defilements associated therewith 
and no more by the groups of existence: this is called the power of insight” 
(Patis I 97). 

“Two things are conducive to knowledge: tranquillity and insight. If 
tranquillity is developed, what profit does it bring? The mind is developed. If 
the mind is developed, what profit does it bring? All lust is abandoned. 


“If insight is developed, what profit does it bring? Wisdom is developed. If 
wisdom is developed, what profit does it bring? All ignorance is abandoned” 
(A II, 2.7). 


There is a method of meditative practice where, in alternating sequence, 
tranquillity-meditation and insight meditation are developed. It is called 
‘tranquillity and insight joined in pairs’ (samatha-vipassand-yuganaddha), 
the coupling or yoking of tranquillity and insight. He who undertakes it, 
first enters into the first absorption. After rising from it, he contemplates 
the mental phenomena that were present in it (feeling, perception, etc.) as 
impermanent, painful and non-self, and thus he develops insight. Thereupon 
he enters into the second absorption; and after rising from it, he again 
considers its constituent phenomena as impermanent, etc. In this way, he 
passes from one absorption to the next, until at last, during a moment of 
insight, the intuitive knowledge of the path (of stream-entry, etc.) flashes 
forth. See AN 4:170; AN 9:36; Patis: Yuganaddhakatha. 


samatha-yanika: ‘one who takes tranquillity as his vehicle’. This is a term 
for a person who not only has reached insight but also one or the other of 
the absorptions, to distinguish him from one ‘who practises only insight’ 
(sukkha-vipassaka, q.v.). 


Source note: First found in the Commentaries. 





164 | SAMBODHI 


sambodhi: bodhi (q.v.). 

sambojjhanga: bojjhanga (q.v.). 

samma-ditthi, -sankappa, -vàca, etc: see magga. 
samma-magga: see micchd-magga. 


samma-padhana: ‘right exertion’, is identical with the sixth link of the 
Eightfold Path (see magga, padhdana). 


samma-sambodhi: ‘Perfect Enlightenment’, Universal Buddhahood, is the 
state attained by a Universal Buddha (samma-sambuddha), i.e., one by whom 
the liberating law (dhamma) which had become lost to the world, has again 
been discovered, realised and clearly proclaimed to the world. 


“Now, someone, in things never heard before, understands by himself the 
truth, and he therein attains omniscience, and gains mastery in the powers. 
Such a one is called a Universal Buddha, or Enlightened One" (Pug 29). 


The doctrine characteristic of all the Buddhas, and each time rediscovered 
by them and fully explained to the world, consists in the four Truths (sacca, 
Q.V.) of suffering, its origin, its extinction and the way to its extinction (see 
magga). See bodhi. 


sammasana: ‘comprehension’, ‘exploring, ‘determining’ (vavatthdna, 
q.v.) is a term for the determining of all phenomena of existence as 
impermanent, miserable and impersonal (anicca, dukkha, anattá), etc., 
which is the beginning of insight (see Patis I, p. 53; Vism XX); also called 
kalapa-sammasana (q.v), ‘comprehension by groups’ (of existence, i.e., 
khandha). 


Source note: This term, as noun, occurs probably for the first time in 
Patis 153, although as a verb it is found already in the old texts (e.g. SN 
12:66). The same holds good with its synonym vavatthdna. 


sammatta: the "state of rightness', comprises the eight links of the Eightfold 
Path (DN 33). See micchatta. 


sammuti-sacca: ‘conventional truth’, is identical with vohdra-sacca (see 
paramattha-sacca). 


Source note: Sammuti is not found in this meaning in the oldest parts 
of the Sutta Pitaka. See sacca; see vohdra-desand, Source note. 


sampada: ‘attainment, blessing’. The five blessings are said to be faith, 
morality, learning, liberality wisdom (A V,91). Further: morality, 
concentration, wisdom, deliverance, the eye of knowledge connected with 
deliverance (AN 5:92). 


sampajaiifia: ‘clarity of consciousness’, ‘clear comprehension’. This term is 
frequently met with in combination with mindfulness (sati). In DN 22, MN 
10 it is said: 





SAMSEVA | 165 


“Clearly conscious is he in going and coming, clearly conscious in looking 
forward and backward, clearly conscious in bending and stretching his body; 
clearly conscious in eating, drinking, chewing and tasting, clearly conscious 
in discharging excrement and urine; clearly conscious in walking, standing, 
sitting, falling asleep and awakening; clearly conscious in speaking and 
keeping silent." For a definition of the term satisampajafifía, see Pug 86. 


According to the Commentaries, ‘clarity of consciousness’ is of four kinds: 
regarding the purpose, the suitability, (inclusion in the meditative) domain, 
and the undeluded conception of the activity concerned. Explained in detail 
in the Commentary to the Satipatthana Sutta (translated in The Way of 
Mindfulness, by Soma Thera; BPS). 


sampaticchana-citta: ‘receptive consciousness’, is the mind-element (mano- 
dhatu) that follows immediately upon the arising of sense-consciousness 
(visual consciousness, etc.), performing on that occasion the function of 
receiving the sense-object. Regarding the other functions of consciousness, 
see vififiana-kicca. 


Source note: First found in the Commentaries. See citta-vithi. 


sampayutta-paccaya: ‘condition of association’, is one of the twenty-four 
conditions (paccaya, q.v.). 


samphappalapam: ‘idle chatter or gossip’; see miccha-váca. 
samphassa: phassa (q.v.). 


samsara: ‘round of rebirth’, lit. ‘perpetual wandering’, means the sea of life 
ever restlessly heaving up and down, the symbol of this continuous process 
of ever again and again being born, growing old, suffering and dying. 
More precisely put, samsára is the unbroken chain of the fivefold khandha 
combinations, which, constantly changing from moment to moment follow 
continuously one upon the other through inconceivable periods of time. Of 
this samsára, a single lifetime constitutes only a tiny and fleeting fraction; 
hence to be able to comprehend the first noble truth of universal suffering, 
one must let one’s gaze rest upon the samsara, upon this frightful chain of 
rebirths, and not merely upon one single lifetime, which, of course, may 
be sometimes less painful. See ti-lakkhana, anattà, paramattha, patisandhi. 


samseva: ‘companionship’. (1) "Through companionship with bad men 
(asappurisa-samseva) comes listening to bad advice, thereby unwise 
reflection, thereby inattention and mental confusion, thereby lack of sense- 
control, thereby threefold bad conduct in bodily action, speech and mind, 
thereby the five hindrances (nivarana, q.v.), thereby craving for existence. 


(2) Through companionship with good men (sappurisa-samseva) comes 
listening to good advice, thereby faith, thereby wise reflection, thereby 
mindfulness and clarity of consciousness, thereby sense-control, thereby 
threefold good conduct, thereby the four foundations of mindfulness 
(satipatthana, q.v.), thereby the seven factors of enlightenment (bojjhanga, 
q.v.), thereby liberation through wisdom (pafifia-vimutti, q.v.)." See AN 10:62. 





166 | SAMUCCHEDA-PAHANA 


samuccheda-pahana: ‘overcoming by destruction’, is the absolute extinction 
of certain fetters of existence (samyojana, q.v.), which takes place by entering 
into one of the four supermundane paths of holiness (see ariya-puggala). 
Regarding the five kinds of overcoming, see pahdna. 


samudaya-sacca: ‘truth of the origin’, i.e., the origin of suffering, is the second 
of the Four Noble Truths (sacca, q.v.). 


samutthana: ‘origination’. There are four kinds of origination of corporeal 
phenomena, namely: through karma, consciousness, temperature, 
nutriment. For example, *karma-produced' (kamma-samutthana = kammaja, 
karma-born) are the sense organs, sexual characteristics, etc., which, 
according to their nature, are conditioned either through wholesome or 
unwholesome karma formations (volitional actions; see paticca-samuppdda, 
2) in a previous existence. *Mind-produced', i.e., consciousness-produced 
(citta-samutthdna = cittaja) are bodily and verbal expression (vififatti, q.v.). 
For a detailed exposition, see Vism XX. 


Source note: Kamma-samutthana (= kamma-ja), utu-samutthana, 
ühüra-samutthàna: these terms are found only in the Commentaries. 
Citta-samutthàna-rüpa, however, occurs already in Dhs (8 586) of the 
Abhidhamma Canon; and is indicated very often in the Patthana, e.g. 
tam (cittam) samutthünanafi ca ripdnam. The teaching of the origin of 
matter is, of course, already implied in the old Sutta texts. 


samvara-padhana: ‘effort to avoid’; see padhdna. 
samvara-sila: ‘indriya-samvara-sila’; see sila. 


samvara-suddhi: ‘purity of control’, is another name for morality 
consisting of restraint of the senses (indriya-samvara-sila; see sila). 


samvatta-kappa: see kappa. 


samvega-vatthu: ‘the sources of emotion, or of a sense of urgency’, are eight: 
“birth, old age, disease, death, being four; the suffering in the lower states of 
existence being the fifth; further, the misery of the past rooted in the cycle of 
rebirth, the misery of the future rooted in the cycle of rebirth, the misery of 
the present rooted in the search after food” (Vism III). 


samvejaniya-tthanani: ‘places rousing emotion’, are four: the place where 
the Perfect One was born, (i.e., the Lumbini-grove near Kapilavatthu, at the 
present frontier of Nepal); the place where he reached Full Enlightenment 
(i.e., Uruvela, the modern Ureli, and Buddhagaya, on the Nerafijara River, 
the modern Lilanja); the place where he, for the first time, unveiled the 
Dhamma to the world (i.e., the deer-park at Isipatana near Benares); the 
place where he entered the final Nibbana (i.e., Kusinara). (AN 4:118). 


samyojana: ‘fetters’. There are ten fetters tying beings to the wheel of 
existence, namely: (1) personality-belief (sakkdya-ditthi, q.v.), (2) sceptical 
doubt (vicikicchá q.v.), (3) clinging to mere rules and ritual (silabbata- 
parámása; see upādāna), (4) sensuous craving (kama-rága, 4.v.), (5) ill 
will (vyapada), (6) craving for fine-material existence (rüpa-raga), (7) 





SANKHARA | 167 


craving for immaterial existence (aripa-rdga), (8) conceit (mana, q.v.), (9) 
restlessness (uddhacca, q.v.), (10) ignorance (avijjd, q.v.). The first five of 
these are called ‘lower fetters’ (orambhagiya-samyojaná), as they tie to the 
sensuous world. The latter five are called ‘higher fetters’ (uddhambhdagiya- 
samyojanda), as they tie to the higher worlds, i.e., the fine-material world and 
the immaterial world (AN 9:67, 68; 10:13; DN 33, etc.). 


He who is free from 1-3 is a sotapanna, or stream-winner, i.e., one who has 
entered the stream to Nibbana, as it were. He who, besides these three fetters, 
has overcome four and five in their grosser form, is called a sakadagami, a 
'once-returner' (to this sensuous world). He who is fully freed from 1—5 is an 
anagami, or ‘non-returner’ (to the sensuous world). He who is freed from all 
the ten fetters is called an arahat, i.e., a perfectly holy one. 


For more details, see ariya-puggala. 


The ten fetters as enumerated in the Abhidhamma, e.g. Vibh XVII, are: 
sensuous craving, ill will, conceit, wrong views, sceptical doubt, clinging to 
mere rules and ritual, craving for existence, envy, stinginess, ignorance. 


saficetana: cetand, q.v. 


sangaha-vatthu: the four ‘ways of showing favour’ are liberality, kindly 
speech, beneficial actions, impartiality (AN 4:32; 8:24). 


sangha: (lit., ‘congregation’ or ‘assembly’) the name for the Community of 
Buddhist monks. As the third of the Three Gems or Jewels (ti-ratana, q.v.) 
and the Three Refuges (ti-sarana, q.v.), i.e., Buddha, Dhamma, and Sangha, 
it applies to the ariya-sangha, the community of the saints, i.e., the four 
noble ones (ariya-puggala, q.v.), the stream-winner, etc. 


sankappa: ‘thought’, is a synonym of vitakka (q.v.). For sammd-sankappa, or 
right thought, see magga (2). 


sankhara: this term has, according to its context, different shades of 
meaning, which should be carefully distinguished. 


(I) To its most frequent usages (1-4, following) the general term ‘formation’ 
may be applied, with the qualifications required by the context. This term 
may refer either to the act of ‘forming’ or to the passive state of “having been 
formed’ or to both. 


(1) As the second link of the formula of dependent origination, (paticca- 
samuppáda, q.v.), sankhara has the active aspect, ‘forming’, and signifies 
‘karma (q.v.), ie. Wholesome or unwholesome volitional activity 
(cetanad) of body (kdya-sankhadra), speech (vaci-sankhüra) or mind 
(citta- or mano-sankhdra). This definition occurs, e.g. at SN 12:2, 27. 
For sankhdara in this sense, the word ‘karma-formation’ has been coined 
by the author. In other passages, in the same context, sankhdra is defined 
by reference to (a) meritorious karma-formations (puññ abhisankhara), 
(b) demeritorious sarkhüra (apuñň ābhisaůkhāra), (c) imperturbable 
sankhara (Gnenj abhisankhara), e.g. in SN 12:51; DN 33. This threefold 





168 | SANKHARUPEKKHA-NANA 


division covers karmic activity in all spheres of existence: the meritorious 
karma-formations extend to the sensuous and the fine-material sphere, the 
demeritorious ones only to the sensuous sphere, and the ‘imperturbable’ 
only to the immaterial sphere. 


(2) The aforementioned three terms, kdya-, vaci- and citta-sankhara are 
sometimes used in quite a different sense, namely as: (1) bodily function, 
i.e., in-and-out-breathing (e.g., MN 10); (2) verbal function, i.e., thought- 
conception and discursive thinking; (3) mental-function, i.e., feeling and 
perception (e.g., MN 44). See nirodha-samapatti. 


(3) It also denotes the fourth group of existence (sarikhaàra-kkhandha), and 
includes all ‘mental formations’ whether they belong to *karmically forming 
consciousness or not. See khandha, Table II and SN 22:56, 79. 


(4) It occurs further in the sense of anything formed (sarkhata, q.v.) and 
conditioned, and includes all things whatever in the world, all phenomena 
of existence. This meaning applies, e.g. to the well-known passage: “All 
formations are impermanent... subject to suffering" (sabbe sankhara 
anicca... dukkhd). In that context, however, sankhdra is subordinate to the 
still wider and all-embracing term dhamma (thing); for dhamma includes also 
the Unformed or Unconditioned Element (asankhata-dhdtu), i.e., Nibbana 
(e.g. in sabbe dhamma anattà, “all things are without a self"). 


(II) sankhàra also means sometimes ‘volitional effort’, e.g., in the formula 
of the roads to power (iddhipdda, q.v.); in sasankhara- and asankhdara- 
parinibbayi (anagami, q.v.); and in the Abhidhamma terms asankhdrika- 
(q.v.) and sasankharika-citta, i.e., without effort, spontaneously, and with 
effort, prompted. 


In Western literature, in English as well as in German, sankhdra is 
sometimes mistranslated by ‘subconscious tendencies’ or similarly (e.g. 
Prof. Beckh: *unterbewufte Bilderkrafte,” i.e., subconscious formative 
forces). This misinterpretation derives perhaps from a similar usage in 
non-Buddhist Skr literature, and is entirely inapplicable to the connotations 
of the term in Pali Buddhism, as listed above under I, 1—4. For instance, 
within dependent origination, sankhàüra is neither subconscious nor a 
mere tendency, but is a fully conscious and active karmic volition. In the 
context of the five groups of existence (see above I, 3), a very few of 
the factors from the group of mental formations (sarkhara-kkhandha) are 
also present as concomitants of subconsciousness (see Tables I-II), but 
are of course not restricted to it, nor are they mere tendencies. 


saükharupekkha-fiana: the 'equanimity-knowledge with regard to the 
formations of existence', is one of those kinds of knowledge which form 
the ‘purification by knowledge and vision of the path-progress (see 
Visuddhi, VI, 8). “It is known by three names: in the lowest stage it is called 
‘knowledge consisting in the desire for deliverance’ (muccitu-kamyata- 
fana), in the middle stage it is called the ‘reflecting contemplation’ 
(patisankhünupassaná-iiána); in the last stage, however, i.e., after attaining 
the summit, it is called the 'equanimity-knowledge with regard to the 
formations of existence' (Vism XXI). 





SAPADANIK' ANGA | 169 


sankhata: the ‘formed’, 1.e., anything originated or conditioned, comprises all 
phenomena of existence. See sankhdra I, 4; asankhata. 


sankhitta citta: in the Satipatthana Sutta, signifies the ‘contracted’ or 
‘cramped’ mind, not the ‘concentrated’ (samahita) mind, as often translated 
by Western authors. See satipatthdna (3). 


safifia: (1) ‘perception’, is one of the five groups of existence (khandha, 
q.v.), and one of the seven mental factors (cetasika) that are inseparably 
bound up with all consciousness (see cetana). It is sixfold as perception of 
the five physical sense-objects and of mental objects. It is the awareness of 
an object distinctive marks (“one perceives blue, yellow, etc.," SN 22:79). 
If, in repeated perception of an object, these marks are recognised, saññā 
functions as ‘memory’ (see Abh St., pp. 68ff.). 


(2) saññā stands sometimes for consciousness in its entirety, e.g. in 
n'eva-safifia-n'asafifiayatana, ‘the realm of neither-perception-nor-non- 
perception’; further, in asafifia-satta, ‘unconscious beings’. In both cases 
reference is not to ‘perception’ alone, but also to all other constituents of 
consciousness. See DN 9. 


(3) saññā may also refer to the ‘ideas’, which are objects of meditation, e.g. 
in a group of seven ideas, of impermanence (anicca-saíifia), etc. (AN 7:46); 
of ten: impurity (asubha-saiifia), etc. (AN 10:56), and another set of ten in 


AN 10:60; or to wrong notions, as in nicca-, subha-safifia (the notion of 
permanence, beauty), etc. 


safifia-vedayita-nirodha: nirodha-samapatti (q.v.). 


safifia-vipallasa: ‘perversion of perception’ (see vipallasa). 
safifiojana: samyojana (q.v.). 


santana (orsantati): ‘continuity’, may refer to the continuity of consciousness 
(citta-santána), of the groups of existence (Kkhandha-santüna), of 
subconsciousness (bhavanga-santàna), of corporeality (rüpa-santàna), to the 
uninterrupted continuity of the paticca-samuppdda (q.v.), etc. 


Source note: The terms citta-santana, rüpa-santàna, khandha-santana, 
bhavanga-santàna, etc., are found, here and there, in the Abhidhamma 
Canon (e.g. Dhs 8 634, Kath 110; see Guide Ch. V), but they are often 
met with in the Abhidhamma Commentaries. In the Suttas (Th 716) is 
found sankhárasantati. 


santirana-citta: ‘investigating consciousness’, is one of the stages in the 
cognitive series. For the fourteen functions of consciousness, see vifiíiana- 
kicca. 


Source note: First found in the Commentaries. See citta-vithi. 
santutthita: ‘contentedness’; see ariya-vamsa. 


sapadanik'anga: see dhutanga. 





170 | SAPPATIGHA-RUPA 


sappatigha-rüpa: ‘corporeality reacting to sense stimuli’, refers to the five 
sense organs (ayatana, q.v.). See Vibh II (see Guide II, Ch. II § 2) and 
Vism XIV; further see patigha 2. 


sarana: see fi-sarana. 


sasana (lit. ‘message’): the Dispensation of the Buddha, the Buddhist 
religion; teaching, doctrine. 


Navanga-buddha-süsana, or  navanga-satthu-sásana, the ninefold 
Dispensation of the Buddha (or the Master) consists of Suttas (suttàni), 
mixed prose (geyya), exegesis (veyydkarandni), verses (gāthāyo), solemn 
utterances (uddndni), sayings of the Blessed One (itivuttaka), birth stories 
(jataka), extraordinary things (abbhuta-dhamma), and analysis (vedalla). 
This classification is often found in the Suttas (e.g. MN 22). According to the 
commentaries, the Vinaya and the Abhidhamma Pitaka also are comprised 
in that ninefold division (see AsTr 33). It is a classification according to 
literary styles, and not according to given texts or books. 


sasankhara-parinibbay1: ‘one who reaches Nibbana with exertion’, is a term 
for one of the five kinds of non-returners (andgami, q.v.). 


sasankharika-citta (in Dhs: sasarkhàürena): a prepared, or prompted, state of 
consciousness, arisen after prior deliberation (e.g. weighing of motives) or 
induced by others (command, advice, persuasion). See Table I; exemplified 
in Vism XIV, 84ff. Opposite: asankharika-citta, q.v. 


sassata-ditthi (-vada): ‘eternity-belief’, is the belief in a soul or personality 
existing independently of the five groups of existence, and continuing after 
death eternally, as distinguished from the ‘annihilation-belief’ (uccheda- 
ditthi), i.e., the belief in a personality falling at death a prey to absolute 
annihilation. For more details, see ditthi. 


sati: ‘mindfulness’, is one of the five spiritual faculties and powers (see bala), 
one of the seven factors of enlightenment (bojjharga, q.v.), and the seventh 
link of the Eightfold Path (magga, q.v.), and is, in its widest sense, one of 
those mental factors inseparably associated with all karmically wholesome 
(kusala, q.v.) and karma-produced lofty (sobhana) consciousness (see 
Table II). For the four foundations of mindfulness see satipatthana. 


satipatthana: the four ‘foundations of mindfulness’, lit. 'awarenesses of 
mindfulness’ (sati-upatthdna), are: contemplation of body, feeling, mind, and 
mind-objects; see sati. 


A detailed treatment of this subject, so important for the practice of Buddhist 
mental culture, is given in the two Satipatthana Suttas (DN 22; MN 10), which 
at the start as well as the conclusion, proclaim the weighty words: “The only 
way that leads to the attainment of purity, to the overcoming of sorrow and 
lamentation, to the end of pain and grief, to the entering of the right path, 
and to the realisation of Nibbana is the four foundations of mindfulness.” 


After these introductory words, and upon the question which these four are, 
it is said that the monk dwells in contemplation of the body, the feelings, 





SATIPATTHANA | 171 


the mind, and the mind-objects, "ardent, clearly conscious and mindful, after 
putting away worldly greed and grief.” 


These four contemplations are in reality not to be taken as merely separate 
exercises, but on the contrary, at least in many cases, especially in the 
absorptions, as things inseparably associated with each other. Thereby 
the Satipatthana Sutta forms an illustration of the way in which these four 
contemplations relating to the five groups of existence (khandha, q.v.) 
simultaneously come to be realised, and finally lead to insight into the 
impersonality of all existence. 


(1) The contemplation of the body (kayaánupassaná) consists of the following 
exercises: mindfulness with regard to in-and-out breathing (anapana-sati, 
q.v.), minding the four postures (iriyapatha, q.v.), mindfulness and clarity of 
consciousness (satisampajaiiia, q.v.), reflection on the thirty-two parts of the 
body (see kayagatasati and asubha), analysis of the four physical elements 
(dhatuvavatthana, q.v.), cemetery meditations (sivathikà q.v.). 


(2) All feelings (vedananupassana) that arise in the meditator he clearly 
perceives, namely: agreeable and disagreeable feeling of body and mind, 
sensual and super-sensual feeling, indifferent feeling. 


(3) He further clearly perceives and understands any state of consciousness 
or mind (cittanupassand), whether it is greedy or not, hateful or not, deluded 
or not, cramped or distracted, developed or undeveloped, surpassable or 
unsurpassable, concentrated or unconcentrated, liberated or unliberated. 


(4) Concerning the mind-objects (dhammdanupassanda), he knows whether 
one of the five hindrances (nivarana, q.v.) is present in him or not, knows 
how it arises, how it is overcome, and how in future it does no more arise. 
He knows the nature of each of the five groups (khandha, q.v.), how they 
arise, and how they are dissolved. He knows the twelve bases of all mental 
activity (ayatana, q.v.): the eye and the visual object, the ear and the audible 
object,... mind and mind-object, he knows the fetters (samyojana, q.v.) 
based on them, knows how they arise, how they are overcome, and how in 
future they do no more arise. He knows whether one of the seven factors 
of enlightenment (bojjhanga, q.v.) is present in him or not, knows how it 
arises, and how it comes to full development. Each of the Four Noble Truths 
(sacca, q.v.) he understands according to reality. 


The four contemplations comprise several exercises, but the Satipatthana 
should not therefore be thought of as a mere collection of meditation 
subjects, any one of which may be taken out and practised alone. Though 
most of the exercises appear also elsewhere in the Buddhist scriptures, 
in the context of this Sutta they are chiefly intended for the cultivation of 
mindfulness and insight, as indicated by the repetitive passage concluding 
each section of the Sutta (see below). The four contemplations cover all 
the five groups of existence (khandha, q.v.), because mindfulness is meant 
to encompass the whole personality. Hence, for the full development of 
mindfulness, the practice should extend to all four types of contemplation, 
though not every single exercise mentioned under these four headings need 
be taken up. A methodical practice of satipatthàna has to start with one of 





172 | SATI-SAMBOJJHANGA 


the exercises out of the group ‘contemplation of the body’, which will serve 
as the primary and regular subject of meditation. The other exercises of the 
group and the other contemplations are to be cultivated when occasion for 
them arises during meditation and in everyday life. 


After each contemplation it is shown how it finally leads to insight- 
knowledge: “Thus with regard to his own body he contemplates the body, 
with regard to the bodies of others he contemplates the body, with regard 
to both he contemplates the body. He beholds how the body arises and how 
it passes away, beholds the arising and passing away of the body. ‘A body 
is there’ (but no living being, no individual, no woman, no man, no self, 
nothing that belongs to a self; neither a person, nor anything belonging to 
a person; Com): thus he has established his attentiveness as far as it serves 
his knowledge and mindfulness, and he lives independent, unattached to 
anything in the world.” 


In the same way he contemplates feeling, mind and mind-objects. 


In MN 118 it is shown how these four foundations of mindfulness may be 
brought about by the exercise of mindfulness on in-and-out breathing 
(anàpána-sati, q.v.). 
Literature: The Way of Mindfulness, translation of The Satipatthana 
Sutta and Commentary, by Soma Thera (3rd ed; Kandy 1967, BPS). 
The Heart of Buddhist Meditation, by Nyanaponika Thera (3rd ed.; 
London. Rider & Co.). The Foundations of Mindfulness (translation of 
MN 10), Nyanasatta Thera (Wheel 19). The Satipatthüna Sutta and its 
Application to Modern Life, V. E Gunaratna (Wheel 60). The Power of 
Mindfulness by Nyanaponika Thera (Wheel 121/122). 


sati-sambojjhanga: ‘mindfulness as a factor of enlightenment’; see 
bojjhanga. 


sati-sampajafifia: ‘mindfulness and clarity of consciousness’; see 
sampajaíifia. 


satta: ‘living being’. This term, just like atta, puggala, jiva, and all the other 
terms denoting 'ego-entity', is to be considered as a merely conventional term 
(vohara-vacana), not possessing any reality-value. For the impersonality of 
all existence, see anattà, paramattha, puggala, jiva, paticca-samuppada. 


sattakkhattu-parama: ‘one with only seven further rebirths at the utmost’, 
is one of the three kinds of stream-winners (sotapanna, q.v.). 


sattavasa (or nava sattavasa): ‘(9) abodes of beings’. In the Sutta-texts (e.g. 
DN 33; AN 9:24) nine such abodes are mentioned: “There are, O monks, nine 
abodes of beings, namely: 


(1) "There are beings who are different in body and different in perception, 
such as the human beings, some heavenly beings, and some beings living in 
the world of suffering (vinipdtika, q.v.). 

(2) "There are beings who are different in body but equal in perception, such 
as the first-born gods of the Brahma-world (i.e., at the beginning of each new 
world-formation; see deva II). 





SELF | 173 


(3) “There are beings who are equal in body but different in perception, such 
as the Radiant gods (Abhassara, see deva II). 


(4) “There are beings who are equal in body and equal in perception, such as 
the All-Illuminating gods (Subhakinha; see deva II). 


(5) "There are beings without perception and feeling, such as the unconscious 
beings (asafifiasatta, q.v.). 

(6) "There are beings who, through the complete overcoming of perceptions 
of matter (rūpa-saññā), the disappearance of perceptions of sense-reaction 
(patigha-safifía), and the non-attention to perceptions of variety, thinking 
‘Boundless is space’, are reborn in the sphere of boundless space (see deva, 
M; jhana, 5). 

(7) “There are beings who, through the complete overcoming of the sphere 
of boundless space, thinking ‘Boundless is consciousness’, are reborn in the 
sphere of boundless consciousness (see jhdna 6). 


(8) “There are beings who, through the complete overcoming of the sphere 
of boundless consciousness, thinking “Nothing is there’, are reborn in the 
sphere of nothingness (see jhana, 7). 


(9) “There are beings who, through the complete overcoming of the sphere 
of nothingness, are reborn in the sphere of neither-perception-nor-non- 
perception (see jhdna, 8)" (AN 9:24). 

According to the Commentary to AN, the beings of the Pure Abodes 
(Suddhdavasa, q.v.) are not mentioned here, for the reason that they exist 
only in those world-periods in which Buddhas appear. See viifianatthiti. 


Sa-upadisesa-nibbana: see Nibbana, upddi. 


savaka: ‘hearer’, i.e., ‘disciple’, refers, ina restricted sense (then mostly ariya- 
sávaka, ‘noble disciple’), only to the eight kinds of noble disciples (ariya- 


puggala, q.v.). 


savaka-bodhi: ‘enlightenment of the disciple’, designates the holiness of the 
disciple, as distinguished from the holiness of the pacceka-buddha (q.v.) and 
the sammd-sambuddha (q.v.). 


sceptical doubt: vicikicchd (q.v.). See kankha. 
scruples: kukkucca (q.v.). 


sekha: a ‘noble learner’, a disciple in higher training, i.e., one who pursues 
the three kinds of training (sikkhá, q.v.), is one of those seven kinds of noble 
disciples who have reached one of the four supermundane paths or the 
three lower fruitions (see ariya-puggala), while the one possessed of the 
fourth fruition, or arahatta-phala, is called ‘one beyond training’ (asekha, lit. 
‘no more learner’). The worldling (puthujjana, q.v.) is called ‘neither a noble 
learner, nor perfected in learning’ (n’eva-sekha-ndsekha). See Pug 23-25. 


self: attd (q.v.). 





174 | SELF-ANNIHILATION 


self-annihilation, craving for: vibhava-tanhd (see tanhda). 
self-confidence: vesdrajja (q.v.). 
self-mortification: atta-kilamatha (q.v.). 


senasana: ‘dwelling place’, is one of the four requisites of the monk’s life 
(see sila 4). To be suitable for spiritual training, it should possess five 
advantages. As it is said (AN 10:11): “But how, O monks, does the dwelling 
place possess five advantages? Such a dwelling place is not too far, nor too 
near (to the village), is suitable for going (on almsround) and returning. In 
the daytime it is not much crowded, and at night without noise and bustle. 
One is not much molested there by gadflies, mosquitoes, wind, sun and 
creeping things. While living there, the monk without difficulty obtains 
robes, alms-food, dwelling, and the necessary medicines. There are elder 
monks living there, with great learning, well versed in the message, masters 
of the Law (dhamma), of the Discipline (vinaya) and of the tables of contents 
(i.e., either the twofold Abhidhamma matrix, or the bhikkhu and bhikkhuni 
Patimokkha; see pdtimokkha). And he approaches them from time to time, 
questions them, asks them for explanations, etc." 


sense organs and objects: see dyatana, dhdatu. 
sense-stimuli, corporeality responding to: see dyatana. 
sensitive corporeality: pasáda-rüpa (q.v.). 

sensuality (subjective and objective): kama (q.v.). 
sensuous clinging: kamupddana; see upddana. 


sensuous craving: kdma-tanhd (-rdga), is one of the ten fetters (samyojana, 
q.v.), and one of the three kinds of craving (tanhd, q.v.). 


sensuous sphere (-world): see avacara, loka. 

serenity: see samatha. 

seven rebirths at the utmost: see sofapanna. 

sex: see bhava. 

sexual intercourse, unlawful: see kümesu micchdcara. 
shame: hiri (q.v.). 

shamelessness: ahirika (q.v.). 

signless (animitta): see ceto-vimutti, vimokkha, vipassana. 


sikkha: the ‘training’, which the Buddhas disciple has to undergo, 
is threefold: training in higher morality (adhisila-sikkha), in higher 
mentality (adhicitta-sikkha), and in higher wisdom (adhipafifia-sikkha). 
This threefold training refers to the threefold division of the Eightfold 





SIKKHA-PADA | 175 


Path (magga, q.v.) in morality, concentration and wisdom (sila, samādhi, 
panna). In DN 16 and AN 4:1 it is said: 


“Tt is through not understanding, not penetrating noble morality... noble 
concentration... noble wisdom... noble deliverance that I, as well as you, 
have had for such a long time to pass through this round of rebirths.” 


"This then is morality, this concentration, this wisdom, this deliverance. 
Being endowed with morality, concentration brings high fruit and blessing. 
Being endowed with concentration, wisdom brings high fruit and blessing. 
Being endowed with wisdom, the mind becomes freed from all cankers 
(Gsava, q.v.) namely, from the sensuous canker (kamasava), from the canker 
of existence (bhavasava), from the canker of opinions (ditthdsava), from the 
canker of ignorance (avijjásava)." 


sikkha-pada: ‘steps of training’, ‘moral rules’. 


The five moral rules, also called pafica-sila which are binding on all Buddhist 
laymen, are: (1) abstaining from killing any living being, (2) from stealing, (3) 
from sexual misconduct, (4) from lying, (5) from the use of intoxicants (see 
surameraya etc.). 


The ten rules (dasa-sila) are binding on all novices and monks, namely: 
(1) abstaining from killing, (2) from stealing, (3) from unchastity, (4) from 
lying, (5) from the use of intoxicants, (6) from eating after midday, (7) from 
dancing, singing, music and shows, (8) from garlands, scents, cosmetics and 
adornments, etc., (9) from luxurious beds, (10) from accepting gold and silver. 


In the eight rules (attha-sila) which on full and new moon days, and on 
the first and last quarter of the moon, are observed by many lay-followers 
(upasaka, q.v.), the seventh and eighth of the above ten rules are fused into 
one as the seventh rule, while the ninth becomes the eighth. 


‘virtue’, is a mode of mind and volition (cetand, q.v.) manifested in speech or 
bodily action (see karma). It is the foundation of the whole Buddhist practice, 
and therewith the first of the three kinds of training (sikkhd, q.v.) that form 
the threefold division of the Eightfold Path (see magga), i.e., morality, 
concentration and wisdom. 


Buddhist morality is not, as it may appear from the negative formulations 
in the Suttas, something negative. And it does not consist in the mere not 
committing of evil actions, but is in each instance the clearly conscious and 
intentional restraint from the bad actions in question and corresponds to the 
simultaneously arising volition. 


Morality of the Eightfold Path, namely, right speech, right action and 
right livelihood, is called ‘genuine or natural morality’ (pakati-sila), as 
distinguished from the external rules for monks or laymen, the so-called 
‘prescribed morality’ (pafifiatti-sila, q.v.), which, as such, is karmically 
neutral. 


“What now is karmically wholesome morality (kusala-sila)? It is the 
wholesome bodily action (kayakamma, see karma), wholesome verbal action 
(vacikamma, see karma), and also the purity with regard to livelihood which I 
call morality" (MN 78). See magga, 3—5. 





176 | SILABBATA-PARAMASA (AND -UPADANA) 


For the five, eight, and ten rules, see sikkha-pada. Further See cdritta- and 
varitta-sila. 

The four kinds of morality consisting of purification (catuparisuddhi-sila) 
are: (1) restraint with regard to the monks’ Disciplinary Code, (2) restraint of 
the senses, (3) purification of livelihood, (4) morality with regard to the four 
requisites (of the monk). 


(1) Restraint withregard to the Disciplinary Code (patimokkha-samvara-sila). 
“Here the monk is restrained in accordance with the monks’ Disciplinary 
Code, is perfect in conduct and behaviour, and perceiving danger even in 
the least offences, he trains himself in the rules he has taken upon him” (AN 
5:87, 109, 114, etc.). 


(2) Restraint of the senses (indriya-samvara-sila). “Whenever the monk 
perceives a form with the eye, a sound with the ear, an odour with the nose, 
a taste with the tongue, an impression with the body, an object with the 
mind, he neither adheres to the appearance as a whole, nor to its parts. And 
he strives to ward off that through which evil and unwholesome things, 
greed and sorrow, would arise, if he remained with unguarded senses; and 
he watches over his senses, restrains his senses” (MN 38). 


(3) Purification of livelihood (Gjiva-parisuddhi-sila). It consists therein that 
the monk does not acquire his livelihood in a way unbefitting to a monk. 


(4) Morality with regard to the four requisites (paccaya-sannissita-sila). It 
consists therein that the monk is guided by the right mental attitude when 
making use of the four requisites: robes, alms-food, dwelling and medicine. 
“Wisely reflecting he makes use of his robes... merely to protect himself 
against cold and heat, etc. Wisely reflecting he makes use of his alms-food... 
merely as a prop and support to this body... Wisely reflecting he makes use 
of his dwelling... merely to keep off the dangers of weather and to enjoy 
solitude... Wisely reflecting he makes use of the necessary medicines, merely 
to suppress feelings of sickness that arise, and to reach perfect freedom from 
suffering’ (See MN 2). 


About these four kinds of morality, Vism I gives a detailed exposition. 


Source note: paccayasannissita-, paccavekkhana-sila, etc., are terms 
used in the Commentaries for the proper contemplation (patisankha 
yoniso) of the four requisites of a monk, often dealt with in the old 
texts (e.g. MN 2). Also the three other parisuddhi-sikkhà-pada, 

as pütimokkhasamvara-sikkhà-pada, indriya-sikkhaà-pada, and 
ajivaparisuddhi-sikkha-pada, though under these names perhaps 
only known in the Commentaries, are fully dealt with in the old texts, 
e.g. MN 53, DN 2, MN 2, etc. The terms pannatti-sikkhá-pada and 
pafifiatti-sikkhá-pada are used only in the Commentaries. 


silabbata-paramasa (and -upadana): ‘attachment (or clinging) to mere rules 
and ritual’, is the third of the ten fetters (samyojana, q.v.), and one of the 
four kinds of clinging (upadana, q.v.). It disappears on attaining to stream- 
entry (sotdpatti). For definition, see upadàna. 


sila-samadhi-pafifia: see sikkhā, magga. 





SOTAPANNA | 177 


silent buddha: pacceka-buddha (q.v.). 
sitting position, sleeping in: see dhutanga. 


sivathika: ‘cemetery contemplations’, as described in DN 22 and MN 10, 
have as their objects a corpse one or two or three days old, swollen up, 
blue-black in colour, full of corruption; a corpse eaten by crows, etc.; a 
framework of bones; flesh hanging from it, bespattered with blood, held 
together by the sinews; without flesh and blood, but still held together by 
the sinews; bones scattered in all direction; bleached and resembling shells; 
heaped together after the lapse of years; weathered and crumbled to dust. At 
the end of each of these contemplations there follows the conclusion: “This 
body of mine also has this nature, has this destiny, cannot escape it.” Similar 
are the ten objects of loathsomeness (asubha, q.v.). 


skilful: kusala (q.v.). 
sloth: middha; see nivarana. 


sobhana: ‘lofty’, ‘beautiful’, ‘pure’, are called, in Abhidh-s, all states of 
consciousness excepting the unwholesome and those without roots 
(ahetuka). Sobhana-sadhürana are called the mental factors (cetasika) 
common to all lofty consciousness, see Table II. 


somanassa: lit. ‘glad-minded-ness’ (su + manas + ya), ‘gladness’, ‘joy’; 
identical with ‘mentally agreeable feeling’ (cetasika sukhà vedand), belongs 
to the feeling-group (vedanakkhandha, see khandha II), and is enumerated 
amongst the twenty-two faculties (indriya, q.v.). It may or may not be 
associated with karmically wholesome consciousness (see Table I, 1-4, 
9-12, 18-21), with karmically unwholesome consciousness (greedy, ibid., 
22-25), and with karmically neutral consciousness (ibid. 40, 42—45, 57—60, 
66—69, 72-76, 81-84). Somanassa is not identical with piti (q.v.). 


somanassüpavicara: ‘indulging in gladness’; see manopavicara. 
something: kificana (q.v.). 
sosanik'anga: see dhutanga. 


sotapanna: the ‘stream-winner’, is the lowest of the eight noble disciples 
(see ariya-puggala). Three kinds are to be distinguished: the one *with seven 
rebirths at the utmost’ (sattakkhattu-parama), the one ‘passing from one 
noble family to another’ (kolankola), the one ‘germinating only once more’ 
(eka-biji). As it is said (e.g. Pug 37-39; AN 3:87): 

(1) “Ifa man, after the disappearance of the three fetters (personality-belief, 
sceptical doubt, attachment to rules and ritual; see samyojana), has entered 
the stream (to Nibbana), he is no more subject to rebirth in lower worlds, 
is firmly established, destined to full enlightenment. After having passed 
amongst the heavenly and human beings only seven times more through 
the round of rebirths, he puts an end to suffering. Such a man is called ‘one 
with seven births at the utmost’ (sattakkhattu-parama). 





178 | SOTAPANNASSA ANGANI 


(2) “If a man, after the disappearance of the three fetters... is destined to 
full enlightenment, he, after having passed among noble families two or 
three times through the round of rebirths, puts an end to suffering. Such a 
man is called ‘one passing from one noble family to another’ (kolarikola). 


(3) “If a man, after the disappearance of the three fetters... is destined to 
full enlightenment, he, after having only once more returned to human 
existence, puts an end to suffering. Such a man is called ‘one germinating 
only once more’ (eka-biji).” See Sotapatti Samyutta (SN 55). 


sotapannassa angani: the ‘characteristic qualities of a stream-winner' are 
four: unshakeable faith towards the Enlightened One, unshakeable faith 
towards the Doctrine, unshakeable faith towards the Order, perfect morality. 
Explained in SN LV, I, DN 33, in SN 47:8 and in Nettippakarana these four 
qualities are called sotapattiyangani (q.v.). 


sotapatti: ‘stream-entry’; see sofapanna; see magga, phala, ‘path and 
fruition of stream-entry'; see ariya-puggala. 


sotapattiyangani: the four (preliminary) ‘conditions to stream-entry’ are: 
companionship with good persons, hearing the Good Law, wise reflection, 
living in conformity with the Law (SN 55:5; DN 33). See sotapannassa 
angani. 

space: see dkasa. 


spheres (ofexistence): avacara (q.v.). The four immaterial spheres (ayatana): 
see jhana (5-8). 


spiritual faculties: see indriya (15-19), indriya-samatta, bala. 
spontaneously born beings: opapdtika (q.v.). 
stains, the three: mala (q.v.). 


standstill (of morality etc.): see hana-bhdagiya-sila; standstill of existence: 
vivatta (q.v.). 


stinginess: macchariya (q.v.); see Table II. 

stored-up karma: katattá; see karma. 

stream-entry: see sotapanna, ariya-puggala. 

streams of merit: puññadhārā (q.v.). 

stream-winner: see sotapanna, ariya-puggala. 
stupid-natured: see carita. 

subconscious stream (of existence): bhavariga-sota (q.v.). 
Subha-kinha (or -kinna): see deva, II. 


subha-nimitta: ‘beautiful (or attractive) object of mind’; it may become an 
inducement to the arising of sense-desire (kamacchanda; see nivarana): “No 





SUKKHA-VIPASSAKA | 179 


other thing do I know, O monks, through which in such a degree sense- 
desire may arise, and once arisen will continue to grow, as an attractive 
object. Whoso does not wisely consider an attractive object, in him sense 
desire will arise, and once arisen will continue to grow” (AN 1:2). 


subha-safifia, -citta, -ditthi: ‘the perception (consciousness or view) of 
beauty (or purity)’ in what is actually devoid of it (asubhe subha-safifia), 
is one of the four perversions (vipallasa, q.v.). 


sublime abodes (or states): brahma-vihàra (q.v.). 
substrata of existence: upadhi (q.v.). 


sucarita: ‘good conduct’, is threefold, in body, speech and mind, and 
comprises the ten wholesome courses of action (see kamma-patha). 
According to AN 10:61, it has sense-control as its condition. See DN 33, 
AN 2:17; 3:2. 


successive births, karma ripening in: see karma. 
suchness: tathatá (q.v.). 
Sudassa, Sudassi: see suddhdvasa. 


suddhavasa: the ‘Pure Abodes’, are a group of five heavens belonging to 
the fine-material world (rüpa-loka, see loka), where only the non-returners 
(anagami, q.v.) are reborn, and in which they attain arahatship and Nibbana 
(ariya-puggala). The names of the inhabitants of these Pure Abodes are: 
Aviha, Atappa, Sudassa, Sudassi, Akanittha. See anágami. 


suddha-vipassana-yanika: sukkha-vipassaka (q.v.). 
suffering: for the four Truths of suffering, see sacca; further see ti-lakkhana. 
sugati: ‘happy course of existence’; see gati. 


sukha: ‘pleasant’, ‘happy’, ‘happiness’, ‘pleasure’, ‘joy’, ‘bliss’. It is one of 
the three feelings (see vedand) and may be either bodily or mental. The 
texts distinguish between the happiness of the senses and the happiness 
of renunciation (AN 2), worldly (carnal; sāmisa) and unworldly (non- 
carnal; niramisa) happiness (MN 10). See AN 2, ch. 8. Happiness is an 
indispensable condition for attaining concentration of mind (samādhi, 
q.v.), and therefore it is one of the five factors (or constituents) of the first 
absorption (jhananga; see jhdna) and is present up to the third absorption 
inclusively. “The mind of the happy one has concentration as its fruit and 
reward” (AN 10:1). “In him who is filled with happiness, right concentration 
has found a foundation” (AN 10:3). 


sukha-safifia, -citta, -ditthi: ‘the perception (consciousness or view) of 
happiness’ in what is actually suffering (dukkhe sukha-saniid), i.e., any form 
of existence, it is one of the perversions (vipallàsa, q.v.). 


sukkha-vipassaka: ‘one supported by bare insight’, is the commentarial 
term for one who, without having attained any of the meditative absorptions 
(jhana, q.v.), has realised only by the support of insight (vipassana, q.v.) one 





180 | SUNNA 


or several of the supermundane paths (see ariya-puggala). In Vism XVIII, 
he is called suddha-vipassanà-yànika, as distinguished from ‘one who has 
tranquillity as vehicle’ (samathaydnika, q.v.). Though the primary meaning 
of sukkha as intended here is as stated above, subcommentaries (e.g. D Tika) 
employ also the literal meaning of sukkha, i.e., ‘dry’: 

“His insight is dry, rough, unmoistened by the moisture of tranquillity 
meditation." This justifies a frequent rendering of this term by ‘dry-visioned’ 
or ‘having dry insight’, which, however, should not lead to misconceptions 
about the nature of insight meditation as being ‘dry’ or ‘merely intellectual’, 
while in fact the development of insight will produce rapture (piti) and a 
sense of urgency (samvega) in the meditator. 


Source note: Also suddha-vipassand-ydnika; these terms are used only 
in the Commentaries, as also their counterpart samathayanika. 


sufifia (adj.), sufifiata (noun): void (voidness), empty (emptiness). As a 
doctrinal term it refers, in Theravada, exclusively to the anattà doctrine, i.e., 
the unsubstantiality of all phenomena: “Void is the world... because it is void 
of a self and anything belonging to a self" (sufifiam attena va attaniyena và; 
SN 35:85); also stated of the five groups of existence (khandha, q.v.) in the 
same text. See also MN 43, MN 106. In Nidd II (quoted in Vism XXI, 55), it 
is said: "Eye... mind, visual objects... mind-objects, visual consciousness... 
mind-consciousness, corporeality... consciousness, etc., are void of self and 
anything belonging to a self; void of permanency and of anything lasting, 
eternal or immutable... . They are coreless: without a core of permanency, 
or core of happiness or core of self." In MN 121, the voiding of the mind 
of the cankers, in the attainment of arahatship, is regarded as the “fully 
purified and incomparably highest (concept of) voidness". See Sn v. 1119; 
MN 121; MN 122 (Wheel 87); Patis: Sufifiakatha; Vism XXI, 53ff. 


sufífiatanupassana: ‘contemplation of emptiness’ (see suñña), is one of the 
eighteen chief kinds of insight (vipassand, q.v.). See Vism XXI. 


sufifiata-vimokkha: 'emptiness-deliverance'; see vimokkha. 
superiority-conceit: see māna. 

supermundane: /okuttara (q.v.); supermundane faculties, see indriya (20-22). 
supernormal: mahaggata (q.v.); supernormal knowledges, see abhififia. 


support, decisive support: (nissaya, upanissaya) are two of the twenty-four 
conditions (see paccaya). 


supportive karma: upatthambhaka-kamma; see karma. 
suppressive karma: upapilaka-kamma; see karma. 


surameraya-majja-pamadatthana veramani sikkha-padam samadiyami: 
“I take upon myself the vow to abstain from taking intoxicants and drugs 
that lead to moral carelessness." This is the wording of the last of the five 
moral rules (see sikkhaá-pada) binding on all Buddhists. 


suta-maya paññā: ‘knowledge based on learning’; see paññā. 





TADANGA-PAHANA | 181 


tadanga-pahana: ‘overcoming by the opposite’, is one of the five kinds of 
overcoming (pahdna, q.v.). 


tadarammana-citta: ‘registering consciousness (see Table I, 40-49, 56), isthe 
last stage in the complete process of cognition (citta-vithi) immediately before 
sinking into the subconscious. It does not occur with the consciousness of 
the absorptions nor with supermundane consciousness, but only with large 
or distinct objects of the sensuous sphere. See vififiana-kicca. 


Source note: First found in the Commentaries. See citta-vithi. 
taints: dsava (q.v.). 
talk, low: tiracchdna-kathd (q.v.). 


tanha: (lit. ‘thirst’): ‘craving’, is the chief root of suffering, and of the ever- 
continuing cycle of rebirths. “What, O monks, is the origin of suffering? It 
is that craving which gives rise to ever-fresh rebirth and, bound up with 
pleasure and lust, now here, now there, finds ever fresh delight. It is the 
sensual craving (kama-tanhá), the craving for existence (bhava-tanhda), the 
craving for non-existence (vibhava-tanha)" (DN 22). Tanhà is the eighth link 
in the formula of dependent origination (paticca-samuppdda, q.v.). See sacca. 


Corresponding to the six sense-objects, there are six kinds of craving: 
craving for visible objects, for sounds, odours, tastes, bodily impressions, 
mental impressions (rüpa-, sadda-, gandha-, rasa-, photthabba-, dhamma- 
tanha) (MN 9; DN 15). 


Corresponding to the threefold existence, there are three kinds: craving for 
sensual existence (kama-tanha), for fine-material existence (ripa-tanha), for 
immaterial existence (arüpa-tanha); see DN 33. There are eighteen ‘thought- 
channels of craving’ (tanhd-vicarita) induced internally, and eighteen induced 
externally; and as occurring in past, present and future, they total 108; see 
AN 4:199; Vibh, Ch. 17 (Khuddakavatthu Vibhanga). 


According to dependent origination, craving is conditioned by feeling; on 
this see DN 22 (section on the Second Truth). 


Ofcravingforexistence(bhava-tanhd)itissaid(AN 10:62): “No firstbeginning 
of the craving for existence can be perceived, O monks, before which it was 
not and after which it came to be. But it can he perceived that craving for 
existence has its specific condition. I say, O monks, that also craving for 
existence has its condition that feeds it (saharam) and is not without it. And 
what is it? ‘Ignorance’, one has to reply.” Craving for existence and ignorance 
are called “the outstanding causes that lead to happy and unhappy destinies 
(courses of existence)" (see Vism XVII, 36-42). 


The most frequent synonyms of tanhd are rdga (q.v.) and lobha (see müla). 





182 | TANHAKKHAYA 


tanhakkhaya: ‘extinction of craving’, is identical with ‘extinction of cankers’ 
(asavakkhaya) and the attainment of perfect holiness or arahatship. See 
ariya-puggala. 


tanha-nissita-sila: ‘morality based on craving (see nissaya). 


Tathagata: the ‘Perfect One’, lit. the one who has ‘thus gone’, or ‘thus come’, is 
an epithet of the Buddha used by him when speaking of himself. 


To the often asked questions, whether the Tathagata still exists after death, 
or not, it is said (e.g. SN 22:85, 86) that, in the highest sense (paramattha, 
q.v.) the Tathagata cannot, even at lifetime, be discovered, how much less 
after death, and that neither the five groups of existence (khandha, q.v.) are 
to be regarded as the Tathagata, nor can the Tathagata be found outside 
these corporeal and mental phenomena. The meaning intended here is that 
there exist only these ever-changing corporeal and mental phenomena, 
arising and vanishing from moment to moment, but no separate entity, no 
personality. 


When the commentaries in this connection explain Tathagata by ‘living 
being’ (satta), they mean to say that here the questioners are using the 
merely conventional expression, Tathagata, in the sense of a really existing 
entity. 

See anatta, paramattha, puggala, jiva, satta. 


9995 


Acommentarial treatise on “The Meaning of the Word “Tathagata” is included 
in The All-Embracing Net of Views (Brahmajala Sutta), translated by Bhikkhu 
Bodhi (BPS). 


Tathagata-bala: the ‘ten powers of the Perfect One’; see dasa-bala. 


tathata: ‘suchness’, designates the firmly fixed nature (bhava) of all things 
whatever. The only passage in the Canon where the word occurs in this 
sense, is found in SN 12:20 and Kath 186 (see V § 189). On the Mahayana 
term tathatá, see Suzuki, Awakening of Faith, pp. 53ff. 


tatra-majjhattata: ‘equanimity’, ‘equipoise’, ‘mental balance’ (lit., 
‘remaining here and there in the middle’), is the name for a high ethical 
quality belonging to the sarkhara-kkhandha (see khandha) and is mostly 
known by the name upekkhd. In its widest sense it is associated with all 
pure consciousness (see Table IT). *Tatramajjhattatà is called the ‘keeping 
in the middle of all things'. It has as characteristic that it effects the balance 
of consciousness and mental factors; as nature (function; rasa), that it 
prevents excessiveness and deficiency, or that it puts an end to partiality; as 
manifestation, that it keeps the proper middle" (Vism XIV, 153). 


Source note: Occurs first in the Commentaries, although as majjhattatà 
it is found in the Vibhanga of the Abhidhamma Canon. See Guide Ch. 
VI $ X. 


Tavatimsa: ‘the Thirty-three (gods)’, a class of heavenly beings in the 
sensuous sphere; see deva (I). 





TI-LAKKHANA | 183 


te-c1varik'anga: ‘practice of the three-rober', is one of the ascetic means 
for purification (dhutanga, q.v.). 


tejo-dhatu: ‘fire-element, heat-element’; see dhdatu. 
tejo-kasina: ‘fire-kasina’, is one of the ten kasina exercises; see kasina. 


temperature: ufu (q.v). For corporeality produced by temperature, 
see samutthana. 


tendencies: anusaya (q.v.). 
terror, awareness of: one of the insight-knowledges; see visuddhi VI. 3. 


te-vijja: ‘one endowed with the threefold (higher) knowledge’. In 
Brahmanism means ‘knower of the three Vedas’ (tri-vidyà), in Buddhism 
means one who has realised three kinds of knowledge, to wit: remembrance 
of former rebirths, the divine eye, extinction of all cankers. For details, 
see abhiññā, 4—6. See Tevijja Sutta, DN 13 (Wheel 57/58). 


Theravada: ‘Doctrine of the Elders’, is a name of the oldest form of the 
Buddhas teachings, handed down in the Pali language. According to 
tradition, its name is derived from the fact of having been fixed by 500 holy 
elders of the Order, soon after the passing away of the Master. 

Theravada is the only one of the old schools of Buddhism that has survived 
among those which Mahayanists have called 'Hinayàna'. It is sometimes 
called Southern Buddhism or Pali Buddhism. It is found today in Sri Lanka, 
Burma, Thailand, Cambodia, Laos, and Chittagong (eastern Bangladesh). 
See Guide Ch. V. 


Source note: This term was already used by the Buddha himself in 
speaking of the doctrine of Alara-Kalama (see MN 26). As a name 
for the Buddha’s doctrine it belongs to the commentarial literature. 


thina-middha: ‘sloth and torpor’, constitute the third of the five hindrances 
(nivarana, q.v.) They may or may not be associated with greedy 
consciousness (see Tables 23, 25, 27, 29 and I). 


thinking, wisdom based on: cintamaya-paíiiia: see pafifia. 


P PED 


thiti-bhagiya-sila, -samadhi, -paíiíía: ‘static morality, static concentration, 
static wisdom’; see hána-bhagiya-sila. 


thought, thought-conception: see vitakka. 
thought, right: sammd-sankappa; see sacca, magga. 
ties, the four: gantha (q.v.). 

ti-hetu-patisandhika: see patisandhi. 


ti-lakkhana: the ‘three characteristics of existence’, or signata, are 
impermanence (anicca, q.v.), suffering or misery (dukkha, q.v.; see sacca, 
dukkhatà), and non-self (anattd, q.v.). 





184 | TIPITAKA 


“Whether Perfect Ones appear in the world, or whether Perfect Ones do 
not appear in the world, it still remains a firm condition, an immutable fact 
and fixed law: that all formations are impermanent, that all formations are 
subject to suffering, that everything is without a self" (AN 3:134). 


“What do you think, O monks: Is corporeality (rapa) permanent or 
impermanent? — Impermanent, O Venerable One. 


"Are feeling (vedand), perception (saññā), mental formations (sankhàra) 
and consciousness (vififíana), permanent or impermanent? — Impermanent, 
O Venerable One. 


“But that which is impermanent, is it something pleasant or painful? — It is 
painful, O Venerable One. 


“But, of what is impermanent, painful and subject to change, could it be 
rightly said, ‘This belongs to me, this am I, this is my ego’? — No, Venerable 
One. 

“Therefore, whatever there is of corporeality, feeling, perception, mental 
formations and consciousness, whether past, present or future, one’s own 
or external, gross or subtle, lofty or low, far or near, of all these things one 
should understand, according to reality and true wisdom: ‘This does not 
belong to me, this am I not, this is not my ego” (SN 22:59). 


“In one who understands eye, ear, nose, tongue, body and all the remaining 
formations as impermanent, painful and non-self, in him the fetters 
(samyojana, q.v.) are dissolved" (SN 35:53). 


It is the full comprehension of the three characteristics by direct meditative 
experience which constitutes liberating insight. About their relation to 
the ‘three gateways of liberation’, see vimokkha I. For further details, 
see anicca, dukkha, anattà, vipassana. 


Literature: The Three Signata, by Prof. O. H. de A Wijesekera (Wheel 
20). The Three Basic Facts of Existence: I-III (Wheel BPS), Vism XX, 
13ff., 18ff.; XXL 47ff., 67ff. 


Tipitaka: ‘The Three Baskets’, is the name for the three main divisions of the 
Pali Canon: the Basket of Discipline (Vinaya Pitaka), the Basket of Discourses 
(Sutta Pitaka) and the Basket of Philosophy (Abhidhamma Pitaka). 


tiracchana-katha: ‘low talk’ lit. *beastlytalk',isthenameintheSutta-textsfor 
the following: “Talk about kings and robbers, ministers and armies, danger 
and war, eating and drinking, clothes and dwellings, garlands and scents, 
relations, chariots, villages and markets, towns and districts, women and 
heroes, street talks, talks by the well, talk about those departed in days gone 
by, tittle-tattle, talks about world and sea, about gain and loss" (AX, 69 etc.). 


In the commentaries four further kinds are enumerated, thus bringing the 
number to thirty-two, as mostly counted, namely: talk about sensuous 
enjoyment, self-mortification, eternity and self-annihilation. 


tiracchana-yoni: ‘animal womb ;birthasanimal. Theanimalkingdom belongs 





TRAINING | 185 


to the sensuous world (see loka), is one of the four lower worlds (see apdaya) 
and one of the three woeful forms of existence (see gati). 


tirana-parififia: ‘full understanding by investigating’; see parififia. 


ti-ratana: ‘Three Jewels’ or Three Gems, which by all Buddhists are revered 
as the most venerable things, are the Buddha, the Dhamma and the Holy 
Sangha, i.e.: the Enlightened One; the law of deliverance discovered, 
realised and proclaimed by him; and the Community of Holy Disciples and 
those who live in accordance with the Law. The contemplations of the three 
Jewels belong to the ten contemplations (anussati q.v.). 


ti-sarana: ‘threefold refuge’, in which every faithful adherent of the Buddha 
puts his whole trust, consists in the Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha 
(see ti-ratana). 


The Buddha, or Enlightened One, is the teacher who by himself has 
discovered, realised and proclaimed to the world the law of deliverance. 
The Dhamma is the law of deliverance. The Sangha is the community of the 
disciples, who have realised or are striving to realise the law of deliverance. 


The threefold Refuge in Pali, by the uttering of which one may also outwardly 
profess one’s faith, is still the same as in the Buddha's time, namely: 


Buddham saranam gacchami 
Dhammam saranam gacchami 
Sangham saranam gacchami 


I take my refuge in the Buddha. 
I take my refuge in the Dhamma. 
I take my refuge in the Sangha. 


Literature: The Threefold Refuge by Nyanaponika Thera (Wheel 76). 
Devotion in Buddhism (Wheel 18). Going for Refuge, by Bhikkhu Bodhi 
(Wheel 282/284). KhpTr pp. 4ff. 


titthayatana: the three ‘articles of (heretical) belief’, which in AN 3:61 are 
declared as leading to inactivity, are: (1) the belief that all happiness and woe 
are produced through former karma (prenatal actions; see karma); (2) that 
everything is uncaused; (3) that everything is created by God. 

(1) is the teaching of Nigantha-Nataputta, the leader of the Niganthas, the 
modern Jains. The fault with this doctrine is that it does not account for that 
happiness and woe which either are the result of the present life’s good 
or bad action, or are associated with the corresponding action. (2) is the 
doctrine of Makkhali Gosala; see ditthi. 

According to the above three doctrines, man is not responsible for his 
actions, so that all moral exertions become useless. 


torpor: thina; see thina-middha (q.v.). 


training, the threefold: sikkhd (q.v.). The steps of training: sikkhd-pada, 
(q.v.). 





186 | TRANCE 


trance: jhàna (q.v.). 


tranquillity (ofmind):seesamatha, samatha-vipassaná, bhavanda, bojjhanga. 
“One who has taken tranquillity as his vehicle’: samathayanika (q.v.). 


tranquilisation, overcoming (of defilements) by way of: see pahüna. 
transference of merit: patti-dàna (q.v.). 

transformation, power of: see iddhi. 

transitoriness: anicca (q.v.). 

treasures, the seven: see dhana (q.v.). 

tree, living under: one of the ascetic practices (dhutanga, q.v.). 


truths, the Four Noble: sacca (q.v). Twofold knowledge of the truths, 
see saccafiana. 


turning away, contemplation of the: vivattanupassaná, see vipassand. 
Tusita: a class of heavenly beings in the sensuous plane; see deva (1). 


twin miracle: yamaka-patihdriya (q.v.). 





UBHATO-BHAGA-VIMUTTA | 187 


U 


ubhato-bhāga-vimutta: the ‘both-ways-liberated one’, is the name of one 
class of noble disciples (ariya-puggala, q.v.). He is liberated in two ways, 
namely, by way of all eight absorptions (jhdna, q.v.) as well as by the 
supermundane path (sotapatti, etc.) based on insight (vipassana, q.v.). In 
MN 70 it is said: 


“Who, O monks, is a both-ways-liberated one? If someone in his own 
person has reached the eight liberations (absorptions), and through wise 
penetration the cankers (asava, q.v.) have become extinguished, such a one 
is called a both-ways-liberated one." See DN 15. 


In the widest sense, one is both-ways-liberated if one has reached one or the 
other of the absorptions, and one or the other of the supermundane paths 
(See AN 9:44). 


The first liberation is also called ‘liberation of mind’ (cetovimutti), the latter 
‘liberation through wisdom’ (pafifia-vimutti). 


The first liberation, however, is merely temporary, being a liberation through 
repression (vikkhambhana-vimutti = vikkhambhana-pahdana: see pahana). 


uccheda-ditthi: ‘annihilation-view’; see ditthi. 


udayabbayanupassana-fíana: ‘knowledge consisting in the contemplation of 
rise and fall’, is the first of the nine insight-knowledges constituting the 
purification by knowledge and vision of the path-progress. For details, 
see visuddhi, VI. 1. 


uddhacca: ‘restlessness’, belongs to the ten fetters (samyojana, q.v.), and to 
the five hindrances (nivarana, q.v.). It is one of those four mental factors 
inseparably associated with all unwholesome consciousness (akusala- 
sadharana, q.v.). See Table II. 


uddhambhagiya-samyojana: the five ‘higher fetters’; see samyojana. 


uddhamsota-akanitthagami: ‘passing upstream to the highest gods’, is 
one of the five kinds of non-returners (andgami, q.v.). 


uggaha-nimitta: see nimitta. 


ugghatitafifiu: ‘one who already during a given explanation comes to 
penetrate the truth’ (Pug). This is one of four types of persons classified 
according to their ability of acquiring insight, mentioned in AN 4:133. See 
also vipacitafifii, neyya, pada-parama. 


See The Requisites of Enlightenment, by LediSayadaw (Wheel 171/174) pp. 1ff. 


ujukata: (kaya-, citta-) ‘uprightness’ (of mental factors and of consciousness), 
is associated with all pure consciousness. See Table II. 





188 | UNCONDITIONED 


Source note: First found in the Dhammasangani of the Abhidhamma 
Canon; see lahutd. 


unconditioned, the: asarikhata (q.v.). Contemplation of the unconditioned 
(= animitta); see vipassana. 


unconscious beings: asaiifiá-satta (q.v.). 


understanding: see ditthi, ñāna, paññā, parififia. Right understanding, 
see magga (1), sacca (IV. I). 


unit: see kalàpa, rüpa-kalapa. 

unprepared, unprompted: see asankhdarika-citta. 
unshakeable deliverance: see ceto-vimutti. 
unshakeable one, the: akuppa-dhamma (q.v.). 
unthinkable things, the four: acinteyya (q.v.). 
unwholesome, karmically: akusala (q.v.). 
upacara: ‘moment of access’; see javana. 


upacara-samadhi: ‘neighbourhood- or access-concentration’, is the degree of 
concentration just before entering any of the absorptions, or jhdnas. It still 
belongs to the sensuous sphere (kamavacara; see avacara). 


upacaya, rüpassa: ‘growth of corporeality’; see khandha I. 


Source note: This is an Abhidhamma term but is already alluded to 
in the old Sutta texts, e.g. MN 149: ayatim paficupadanakkhandhà 
upacayam gacchanti, or in DN 2: ayam kayo... odana-kummás upacayo. 


upacchedaka-kamma: ‘destructive karma’; see karma. 


upadana: ‘clinging’, according to Vism XVII, is an intensified degree of 
craving (tanhd, q.v.). The four kinds of clinging are: sensuous clinging 
(kamupddana), clinging to views (ditthupadana), clinging to mere rules and 
ritual (silabbatupadana), clinging tothepersonality-belief(atta-vadupddana). 
(1) “What now is the sensuous clinging? Whatever with regard to sensuous 
objects there exists of sensuous lust, sensuous desire, sensuous attachment, 
sensuous passion, sensuous deludedness, sensuous fetters: this is called 
sensuous clinging. 


(2) “What is the clinging to views? ‘Alms and offerings are useless; there 
is no fruit and result for good and bad deeds: all such views and wrong 
conceptions are called the clinging to views. 


(3) “What is the clinging to mere rules and ritual? The holding 
firmly to the view that through mere rules and ritual one may reach 
purification: this is called the clinging to mere rules and ritual. 


(4) “What is the clinging to the personality-belief? The twenty kinds of ego- 
views with regard to the groups of existence (see sakkaya-ditthi): these are 
called the clinging to the personality-belief" (Dhs $8 1214-17). 





UPAHACCA-PARINIBBA YI | 189 


This traditional fourfold division of clinging is not quite satisfactory. Besides 
kamupddana we should expect either rāpupādāna and arūpupādāna, or 
simply bhavupdadana. Though the anagamiis entirely free from the traditional 
four kinds of upadàna, he is not freed from rebirth, as he still possesses 
bhavupadàna. The Commentary to Vism XVII, in trying to get out of this 
dilemma, explains kamupadana as including here all the remaining kinds of 
clinging. 

*Clinging' is the common rendering for upādāna, though ‘grasping’ would 
come closer to the literal meaning of it, which is ‘uptake’; see Three Cardinal 
Discourses (Wheel 17), p. 19. 


upadanakkhandha: the five ‘groups of clinging’, or more clearly stated in 
accordance with Vism, ‘the five groups of existence which form the objects 
of clinging’. See MN 44, and see khandha. 


upada-rüpa: ‘derived corporeality', signifies the twenty-four secondary 
corporeal phenomena dependent on the four primary physical elements, 
i.e., the sense organs and sense-objects, etc. See khandha I. 


Source note: Upada-rüpa is, as such, an Abhidhamma term, but it is 
used with the same meaning in the Sutta texts, e.g. in MN 9: catunnafi 
camahabhitanam upádaya rüpam. Upādāis an abbreviation of upádàya 
(gerund). 


upadhi: ‘substratum of existence’. In the Commentaries there are enumerated 
four kinds: the five groups (khandha, q.v.), sensuous desire (kama), mental 
defilements (Kilesa, q.v.), karma (q.v.). In the Suttas it occurs frequently in 
Sn (vv. 33, 364, 546, 728) and, with reference to Nibbana, in the phrase “the 
abandoning of all substrata” (sabbüpadhi-patinissagga; DN 14). See viveka 
(3). 


upadi: lit. ‘something which one grasps, to which one clings’, i.e., the five 
groups of existence (khandha, q.v.). In the Suttas, the word is mostly used in 
such expressions as “One of the two fruits may be expected: either perfect 
wisdom or, if the groups are still remaining (sati upddisese, ‘if there is a 
remainder of groups’), the fruit of anagaámi" (DN 22). Further (AN 4:118): 
“Here the Perfect One has passed into the Nibbana-element in which no 
more groups are remaining (anupddi-sesa).” See Nibbana. 


upadinna-rüpa: ‘karmically acquired corporeality’, or ‘matter clung-to (by 
karma)’, is identical with karma-produced corporeality (kammaja-rüpa; 
see samutthdna). In Vism XIV it is said: “That corporeality which, later on, 
we shall refer to as *'karma-produced' (kammaja) is, for its being dependent 
on previous (pre-natal) karma, called 'karmically acquired’.” The term 
(upddinna) occurs so in the Suttas, e.g. MN 28 (Wheel 101), 62, 140. See 
Dhs § 990; Khandha Vibhanga. 


upaghataka-kamma: destructive karma’; see karma. 


upahacca-parinibbay1: ‘one whoreaches Nibbana within the first half of life’, 
is one of the five kinds of anagàmi (q.v.). 





190 | UPAKKILESA 


upakkilesa: ‘impurities’, corruptions, imperfections (a frequent rendering by 
‘defilements’ is better reserved for kilesa, q.v.). 


A list of sixteen moral ‘impurities of the mind’ (cittassa upakkilesa) is 
mentioned and explained in MN 7 & 8 (Wheel 61/62): 1. covetousness and 
unrighteous greed (abhijjhá-visama-lobha), 2. ill will (vyapáda), 3. anger 
(kodha), 4. hostility (upanáha), 5. denigration (makkha), 6. domineering 
(palàsa), 7. envy (issd), 8. stinginess (macchariya), 9. hypocrisy (maya), 10. 
fraud (satheyya), 11. obstinacy (thambha), 12. presumption (sárambha), 13. 
conceit (māna), 14. arrogance (atimdna), 15. vanity (mada), 16. negligence 
(pamada). 


There are three groups of upakkilesa pertaining to meditation: 


(a) Nine mental imperfections occurring in 'one devoted to higher mental 
training (adhicitta); three coarse ones — evil conduct in deeds, words and 
thoughts; three medium — thoughts of sensual desire, ill will and cruelty; 
three subtle — thoughts about one's relatives, one's country and one's 
reputation (AN 3:100). 


(b) Eighteen imperfections in the practice of mindfulness of breathing 
(ānāpāna-sati, q.v.), mentioned in Patis: Anapanakatha (translated in 
Mindfulness of Breathing, p. 60, by Nanamoli Thera, BPS). 


(c) Ten 'imperfections of insight' (-meditation, vipassanüpakkilesa); 
see visuddhi V. 


upanissaya-paccaya: decisive support’ or ‘inducement’, is one of the twenty- 
four conditions (paccaya, q.v.). 


upapajja-vedaniya-kamma: ‘karma ripening in the next birth’; see karma. 
upapatti-bhava: ‘rebirth-process’; see bhava. 
upapilaka-kamma: ‘suppressive karma’; see karma. 


upasaka: lit. ‘sitting close by’, i.e., a ‘lay adherent’, is any lay follower who is 
filled with faith and has taken refuge in the Buddha, his doctrine and his 
community of noble disciples (AN 8:25). His virtue is regarded as pure if he 
observes the five Precepts (pafica-sila; see sikkhda-pada). He should avoid the 
following wrong ways of livelihood: trading in arms, in living beings, meat, 
alcohol, and poison (AN 5:177). See also AN 8:75. 


upasamanussati: ‘recollection of the peace of Nibbana’, is the last of the ten 
recollections (anussati, q.v.). ^Whatsoever, O monks, there are of things, as 
highest of them is considered detachment (virdga), i.e., the crushing of 
conceit, the stilling of thirst, the uprooting of clinging, the breaking through 
the round of rebirths, cessation of craving, detachment, extinction, Nibbana” 
(AN 4:34). 


upasika: ‘female adherent’; see updsaka. 


upatthambhaka-kamma: ‘supportive karma’; see karma. 





UTU-SAMUTTHANA-RUPA | 191 


upavicara: see manopavicára. 


upekkha: ‘equanimity’, also called tatramajjhattatà (q.v.), is an ethical quality 
belonging to the sankhdra-group (see khandha) and should therefore not 
be confounded with indifferent feeling (adukkha-m-asukhà vedana) which 
sometimes also is called upekkha (see vedanà). 


Upekkha is one of the four sublime abodes (brahma-vihára, q.v.), and of the 
factors of enlightenment (bojjhanga, q.v.). See Vism IV, 156ff. 


upekkha-fiana: sankhaürupekkha-fiána (q.v.). 
upekkha-sambojjhanga: ‘equanimity as a factor of enlightenment’; 


see bojjhanga. 


upekkha-sukha: 'equanimous happiness, is the feeling of happiness 
accompanied by a high degree of equanimity (upekkha) as, e.g., in the third 
absorption (jhana q.v.). 


upekkha-vedana: see vedand. 


upekkhindriya: the ‘faculty of indifference’, is one of the five elements of 
feeling (MN 115) and therefore not to be confounded with the ethical quality 
‘equanimity’, also called upekkhd (q.v.). 


upekkhopavicara: ‘indulging in indifference’; see manopavicára. 


uposatha: lit. ‘fasting’, i.e., ‘fasting day’, is the full-moon day, the new-moon 
day, and the two days of the first and last moon-quarters. On full-moon and 
new-moon days, the Disciplinary Code, the Patimokkha, is read before the 
assembled community of monks (bhikkhu), while on the mentioned four 
moon-days many of the faithful lay devotees go to visit the monasteries, and 
there take upon themselves the observance of the eight rules (attha-sila; 
sikkhad-pada). See AN 8:41ff. 


uprightness: ujukatà (q.v.). 

upstream to the highest gods, passing: see anágami. 

usages, the four noble: ariya-vamsa (q.v.). 

utu: temperature; heat, is identical with the heat element (tejodhdtu, q.v.). 


utu-samutthana (= utuja)-rüpa: ‘corporeality produced by temperature’, 
see samutthana. 


192 | vAca 





V 


vaca: ‘speech’. On right speech, see magga (3), sacca (IV.3). Low talk, 
see tiracchana-katha. 


vaci-kamma: ‘verbal action’; see karma, kamma-patha. 


vaci-sankhara: ‘verbal karma-formation', or ‘verbal function’. 
(1) For verbal karma-formation, see sarikhàra (I. 1). 


(2) For verbal function (of mind), i.e., thought-conception and discursive 
thinking, see sarikhara (I. 2). 


vac1-vififiatti: see viññatti. 
vanishing, contemplation of: vayanupassaná, is one of the eighteen chief 
kinds of insight (vipassana, q.v.). 


vanishing and reappearing: knowledge of the vanishing and reappearing of 
beings according to karma, is identical with the divine eye (see abhififia 5). 


varitta-sila: ‘morality consisting in avoiding (evil things), as distinguished 
from ‘morality consisting in performing’ (good things). See caritta-varitta. 


Source note: First found in the Commentaries; see cáritta-sila. 


vasi: ‘mastery’. Vism IV speaks of five kinds, which anyone who wishes to 
develop the absorptions (jhàna, q.v.) should acquire first of all, with regard 
to the first absorption, namely: mastery in adverting to it (avajjana-vasi), in 
entering it (samàpajjana-vasi), in determining it (adhitthana-vasi), in rising 
therefrom (vutthdna-vasi), in retrospection (paccavekkhana-vasi). 


“If wherever, whenever, and for whatever duration desired, one enters the 
first absorption, and at one’s entering it, no slowness is experienced, this is 
called mastery in entering the absorption, etc. In an analogous way, the four 
remaining kinds are to be explained" (Vism IV, 131ff.; XXIII, 27ff.). 


Source note: The five kinds of vast are found first in the 
Patisambhidamagga (I, 99-100). 


vatta: 1. ‘round’, 2. ‘round of rebirths’. 


(1) With reference to dependent origination (paticca-samuppáda, q.v.), 
Vism XVII speaks of threerounds: the karmaround (kamma-vatta) comprising 
the karma-formations and the karma-process (second and tenth links); 
the round of defilements (kilesa-vatta) comprising ignorance, craving and 
clinging (first, eighth, and ninth links); the round of results (vipáka-vatta) 
comprising consciousness, mind and corporeality, six bases, impression, 
feeling (third through seventh links). See paticca-samuppáda (diagram). 


(2) round of rebirth = samsdra (q.v.). 


vatthu: ‘physical base’, i.e., the six physical organs on which the mental 





VEDANA | 193 


process is based, are the five physical sense organs and, according to the 
Commentaries, the heart (hadaya-vatthu, q.v.) as the sixth. This sixth vatthu 
must not be confounded with the sixth ayatana, which is a collective name 
for all consciousness whatever. 


Source note: Vatthu as a general term for the five sense organs (cakkhu- 
vatthu, etc.) is frequent in the Commentaries, and often used together 
with Grammana (object). This usage, however, is already indicated in 
the Abhidhamma Canon: Cakkhum p'etam... vatthum p'etam (Dhs 
§ 597; Vibh, p.71, PTS): cakkhuvififianassa vatthu (Dhs §§ 679ff.). 


vatthu-kama: 'objective sensuality', the five sense-objects; see kama. 


vavatthana: ‘determining’, defining. In its application to insight meditation, 
this term occurred first in Patis (I, p. 53); but in a verbal form, as a past 
participle, already in MN 111: tyassa dhamma anupadavavatthita honti, 
"these things (the mental factors) were determined by him (i.e., Sariputta) 
successively” (see Abh St., p. 54). In Vism XX, 130, it is said: “The 
determining of the truth of suffering is effected with the determining 
of mind-and-body in the purification of view (see visuddhi III). The 
determining of the truth of origination is effected with the discerning of 
conditions in the purification by transcending doubt (see visuddhi IV). The 
determining of the truth of the path is effected by emphasis on the right path 
in the purification by knowledge and vision of what is path and non-path 
(see visuddhi V). Thus the determining of the three truths (suffering, origin, 
path) has been first effected by means of mundane (/okiya, q.v.) knowledge 
only.” See sammasana, visuddhi. 


For the determining of the four physical elements, see dhatuvavatthana. 


vayanupassana: ‘contemplation of vanishing’, is one of the eighteen chief 
kinds of insight (vipassand, q.v.). 


vayo-dhatu: ‘wind-element’; see dhátu. 
vayo-kasina: ‘wind-kasina’, is one of the kasina exercises (kasina, q.v.). 


vedana: ‘feeling’, sensation, is the second of the five groups of existence 
(see khandha II). According to its nature, it may be divided into five classes: 
(1) bodily agreeable feeling (kāyikā sukhd-vedand = sukha); (2) bodily 
disagreeable feeling (kayikadukkha-vedaná - dukkha); (3) mentally agreeable 
feeling (cetasika sukhá-vedaná = somanassa); (4) mentally disagreeable 
feeling (cetasika dukkha-vedaná = domanassa); (5) indifferent or neutral 
(adukkha-m-asukhá vedana = upekkhà, q.v.). With regard to the six senses, one 
distinguishes six kinds of feeling: feeling associated with seeing, hearing, 
smelling, tasting, bodily impression and mental impression. The textual 
wording of it is ‘feeling arisen through visual contact’ (cakkhu-samphassaja 
vedana; SN 22:55; DN 22), etc. 


Feeling is one of the seven mental factors inseparably associated with 
all consciousness whatever; see nama. In the formula of dependent 
origination (paticca-samuppdda, q.v.), feeling is the condition for the 





194 | VEDANANUPASSANA 


arising of craving (tanha). The above-mentioned five kinds of feeling 
are enumerated amongst the twenty-two faculties (indriya, q.v.). See MN 
59; Contemplation of Feeling (Vedanà Samyutta), by Nyanaponika Thera 
(Wheel 303/304). 


vedananupassana: ‘contemplation of feeling’, is one of the four foundations of 
mindfulness (satipatthàna q.v.). 


Vehapphala: a class of heavenly beings in the fine-material world; see deva. 
verbal action: vaci-kamma; see karma. 
verbal functions of mind: vaci-sankhdra; see sankhdara. 


vesarajja: ‘self-confidence’ ofa Buddha is fourfold. He is confident: 1.tohave 
attained to a perfect Enlightenment of which it cannot be said that it omits 
anything essential to it; 2. to have destroyed all cankers (asava), leaving 
none that can be said to be undestroyed by him; 3. that what were declared 
by him as obstacles to liberation are undeniably such; 4. that his teaching 
fulfils its purpose of actually leading to final liberation from suffering. See 
AN 4:8; 7:58; MN 12. 


vibhajja-vada: ‘analytical or discriminating doctrine’ is an early name for the 
original Buddha-doctrine, called Theravada. The term vibhajja-vádi occurs 
in MN 99 and AN 10:94, though not in the sense of a separate school, but as 
a characteristic of the Buddha himself: “Now, by blaming what is blamable 
and praising what is praiseworthy, the Blessed One is a ‘discriminating 
teacher’ (vibhajja-vddi) and is not one-sided in his teaching" (AN 10:94). 


Buddhaghosa, in the introduction to his Commentary on the Kathavatthu, 
says that in Asoka’s time, when the Sangha prospered, many heretics 
took ordination as Buddhist monks but continued to spread their wrong 
doctrines. For purifying the Sangha, Asoka, together with the venerable 
Moggaliputtatissa, summoned an assembly of the bhikkhus. When each 
of the assembled was individually questioned by the king about what the 
Buddha taught, those who said that he was an eternalist (sassata-vddi), 
etc. were expelled. The genuine bhikkhus replied that the Buddha was a 
vibhajja-vàdi, an ‘analyst’ or ‘discriminating teacher’; and when, on the 
king’s question, Moggaliputtatissa confirmed that this was the correct 
view, those monks were admitted to the uposatha (q.v.) assembly of the 
Sangha, and from their midst the participants of the third Council at 
Pataliputta were selected. See Mahavamsa, translated by Wilhelm Geiger, 
Ch. V, v. 268ff. 


vibhava-ditthi: uccheda-ditthi; see ditthi. 


vibhava-tanha: ‘craving for non-existence’, or for self-annihilation; 
see tanhd. 


vicara: ‘discursive thinking’; see vitakka-vicara. 


vicikiccha: ‘sceptical doubt’, is one of the five mental hindrances (nivarana, 
q.v.) and one of the three fetters (samyojana, q.v.), which disappear forever 





VIMOKKHA | 195 


at stream-entry, the first stage of holiness (see ariya-puggala). As a fetter, it 
refers to sceptical doubt about the Master (the Buddha), the Teaching, the 
Sangha, and the training; about things past and future, and conditionality 
(Dhs § 1004; see AN 10:71). It also applies to uncertainty whether things 
are wholesome or not, to be practised or not, of high or low value, etc. 
According to Vism XIV, 177, vicikicchà is the lack of desire to think (things 
out, i.e., to come to a conclusion; vigata-cikicchd, desiderative to V cit, to 
think); it has the nature of wavering, and its manifestation is indecision 
and a divided attitude; its proximate cause is unwise attention to matters 
of doubt. It is associated with one of the two classes of unwholesome 
consciousness rooted in delusion (Table I, No. 32). See also karikha. 


view, right: samma-ditthi; see ditthi, magga 1, sacca IV, 1. For wrong view, 
see ditthi. 


vigata-paccaya: ‘disappearance’, is one of the twenty-four conditions 
(paccaya, q.v.). 


vihara: ‘abode’ There are three abodes: the heavenly abode (dibba-vihara), 
the divine abode (brahma-vihara, q.v.), the noble abode (ariya-vihara). See 
AN 3:63; DN 33. 


vijja: '(higher) knowledge’, gnosis. For the threefold knowledge, 
see abhiññā and te-vijja. See vijja-carana. 


vijja-carana: ‘knowledge and conduct’. This expression occurs in those 
passages in the Suttas where the qualities of a Buddha are described, namely: 
"Truly, the Blessed One is holy, is fully enlightened, perfect in knowledge 
and conduct...". According to Vism VII, 1 and DN 3, knowledge (vijja) 
refers here either to the threefold knowledge (see fe-vijja), or to the eight 
kinds of knowledge, namely: the six higher spiritual powers (abhififia, q.v.), 
insight (vipassand, q.v.), and magical power (iddhi, q.v.); while conduct 
(carana) refers to fifteen things: moral restraint, watching over the sense- 
doors, moderation in eating, wakefulness, faith, moral shame, moral dread, 
great learning, energy, mindfulness, wisdom, and the four absorptions. 


vikkhambhana-pahana: ‘overcoming by repression’ (or ‘suspension’), is 
one of the five kinds of overcoming (pahdna, q.v.). See MN 20 (translated 
in Wheel 21). 


vikubbana-iddhi: the ‘power of transformation’, is one of the magical 
faculties (iddhi, q.v.). 


vimamsa: ‘investigation, inquiry, pondering’, is one of the four roads to 
power (iddhi-pdda, q.v.) and one of the four factors of predominance (see 
paccaya, 3). 


vimokkha: ‘liberation’ (deliverance). I. the three; II. the eight. 
(D) 


The three liberations are: (1) the conditionless (or signless) liberation 
(animitta-vimokkha), (2) the desireless liberation (appanihita-vimokkha), 





196 | VIMOKKHA 


(3) the emptiness (or void) liberation (suiifíata-vimokkha). They are also 
called ‘the triple gateway to liberation’ (vimokkha-mukha; Vism XXI, 
66ff.), as they are three different approaches to the paths of holiness. See 
visuddhi VI, 8. See Vis XXI, 6ff., 121ff.; Patis: Vimokkhakatha. 


(1) “Whosoever being filled with determination (adhimokkha, q.v.), 
considers all formations as impermanent (anicca), such a one attains the 
conditionless liberation. 


(2) “Whosoever being filled with tranquillity, considers all formations as 
painful (dukkha), such a one attains the desireless liberation. 


(3) “Whosoever being filled with wisdom, considers all formations as 
without a self (anattà), such a one attains the emptiness liberation" (Vism 
XXI, 70 = Patis IL, p. 58). 

(1) and (2) are mentioned and explained in MN 43, under the name of 
deliverances of mind (ceto-vimutti, q.v.). (2) and (3) appear in Dhs (88 344ff., 
344ff., 353ff.) in the section on supermundane consciousness (see AsTr, pp. 
290ff.). 


(ID 


The eight liberations (attha-vimokkha) occur frequently in the texts (AN 
8:66; DN 16, etc.) and are described as follows: 


“There are eight liberations, O monks. Which are these? 


(1) *While remaining in the fine-material sphere (rüpi), one perceives 
corporeal forms: this is the first liberation. 


(2) “Not perceiving corporeal forms on one's own person, one perceives 
corporeal forms externally: this is the second liberation. 


(3) “By thinking of the beautiful, one is filled with confidence: this is the 
third liberation. 


(4) "Through the total overcoming of the corporeality-perceptions, 
the vanishing of the reflex-perceptions, and the non-attention to the 
multiformity-perceptions, with the idea ‘Unbounded is space’, one reaches 
the sphere of unbounded space (akasanaficayatana) and abides therein: this 
is the fourth liberation. 


(5) "Through the total overcoming of the sphere of unbounded space, and 
with the idea ‘Unbounded is consciousness’, one reaches the sphere of 
unbounded consciousness (vififiánaficayatana) and abides therein: this is 
the fifth liberation. 


(6) “Through the total overcoming ofthe sphere of unbounded consciousness, 
and with the idea ‘Nothing is there’, one reaches the sphere of nothingness 
(akificafifíayatana) and abides therein: this is the sixth liberation. 
(7) “Through the total overcoming of the sphere of nothingness, one 
reaches the sphere of neither-perception-nor-non-perception (n’ eva-safifiá- 
ndsanndyatana) and abides therein: this is the seventh liberation. 


VINNANA | 197 





(8) “Through the total overcoming of the sphere of neither-perception-nor- 
non-perception, one reaches the extinction of perception and feeling (see 
nirodha-samapatti): this is the eighth liberation. 


These, O monks, are the eight kinds of liberation.” 


For (1-3), see abhibhayatana; for (4-7), see jhüna; for (8), see nirodha- 
samapatti. 


By (3) is meant the attainment of the fine-material absorptions (jhdna, q.v.) 
by means of concentrating the mind on perfectly pure and bright colours as 
objects of the kasina (q.v.). According to Patis this mental state is produced 
also by concentrating the mind on the four sublime states, i.e., all-embracing 
kindness, compassion, sympathetic joy and equanimity, in consequence of 
which all beings appear perfectly pure and glorified, and thus the mind 
turns to the beautiful. 


See Patis: Vimokkhakatha; AsTr, p. 255. 


Source note: The three, i.e., sufifiatd-vimokkha, animitta-vimokkha, 
appanihita-vimokkha, are for the first time described and enumerated 
in Patis II, 351. As suññatā-samādhi, etc., however, they are already 
given at DN 33. 


vimutti: ‘deliverance’, is of two kinds: deliverance of mind (ceto-vimutti, q.v.) 
and deliverance through wisdom (pafifia-vimutti, q.v.). 


‘Deliverance of mind’, in the highest sense, is that kind of concentration 
(samādhi) which is bound up with the path of arahatship (arahatta-magga); 
‘deliverance through wisdom’ is the knowledge (/iana) bound up with the 
fruition of arahatship (arahatta-phala). See AN 5:142. 


There are also five kinds of deliverance, identical with the five kinds of 
overcoming (pahana, q.v.). 


vinipata: ‘world of suffering’, is another name for the four woeful courses 
(duggati; see gati) of existence, and for the four lower worlds (apdya, q.v.). 


The stream-winner (sotapanna, q.v.) is no longer subject to rebirth in them 
(avinipata-dhamma). 


vififiana: ‘consciousness’, is one of the five groups of existence (aggregates; 
khandha, q.v.); one of the four nutriments (Ghdra, q.v.); the third link of 
dependent origination (paticca-samuppdda, q.v.); the fifth in the sixfold 
division of elements (dhdatu, q.v.). 


Viewed as one of the five groups (khandha), it is inseparably linked with 
the three other mental groups (feeling, perception and formations) and 
furnishes the bare cognition of the object, while the other three contribute 
more specific functions. Its ethical and karmic character, and its greater or 
lesser degree of intensity and clarity, are chiefly determined by the mental 
formations associated with it. 


Just like the other groups of existence, consciousness is a flux (vififiana- 
sota, 'stream of consciousness') and does not constitute an abiding mind- 





198 | VINNANA-KICCA 


substance; nor is it a transmigrating entity or soul. The three characteristics 
(see ti-lakkhana), impermanence, suffering and no-self, are frequently 
applied to it in the texts (e.g., in the Anattalakkhana Sutta, SN 22:59). The 
Buddha often stressed that “apart from conditions, there is no arising of 
consciousness’ (MN 38); and all these statements about its nature hold good 
for the entire range of consciousness, be it “past, future or presently arisen, 
gross or subtle, in oneself or external, inferior or lofty, far or near” (SN 
22:59). 


According to the six senses it divides into six kinds, viz. eye- (or visual) 
consciousness (cakkhu-vififiana), etc. About the dependent arising of these 
six kinds of consciousness, Vism XV, 39 says: "Conditioned through 
the eye, the visible object, light and attention, eye-consciousness arises. 
Conditioned through the ear, the audible object, the ear-passage and 
attention, ear-consciousness arises. Conditioned, through the nose, the 
olfactory object, air and attention, nose-consciousness arises. Conditioned 
through the tongue, the gustatory object, humidity and attention, tongue- 
consciousness arises. Conditioned through the body, bodily impression, 
the earth-element and attention, body-consciousness arises. Conditioned 
through the subconscious mind (bhavariga-mano), the mind-object and 
attention, mind-consciousness arises.” 


The Abhidhamma literature distinguishes eighty-nine classes of 
consciousness, being either karmically wholesome, unwholesome or 
neutral, and belonging either to the sense-sphere, the fine-material or the 
immaterial sphere, or to supermundane consciousness. See Table I. 


vifífiana-kicca: ‘functions of consciousness’, as exercised within a process 
of consciousness or cognitive series (citta-vithi). In the Abhidhamma 
Commentary and Vism XIV the following functions are mentioned: rebirth 
(patisandhi), subconsciousness (bhavariga), advertence (Gvajjana), seeing, 
hearing, smelling, tasting, body-consciousness; receiving (sampaticchana), 
investigating (santirana), determining (votthapana), impulsion (javana), 
registering (tadarammana), dying (cuti). 

A single unit of sense-perception (e.g. visual consciousness), being 
conditioned through a sense organ and its corresponding object, forms 
in reality an extremely complex process, in which all the single phases 
of consciousness follow one upon another in rapid succession, while 
performing their respective functions, e.g.: 


“As soon as a visible object has entered the range of vision, it acts on the 
sensitive eye-organ (cakkhu-pasdda), and conditioned thereby an excitation 
of the subconscious stream (bhavarga-sota) takes place. 


“As soon, however, as subconsciousness is broken off, the functional mind- 
element (see Table I, 70), grasping the object and breaking through the 
subconscious stream, performs the function of ‘adverting the mind towards 
the object (avajjana). 


"Immediately thereupon there arises at the eye-door, and based on the 
sensitive eye-organ, the eye-consciousness, while performing the function 
of ‘seeing’ (dassana)... 


"Immediately thereafter there arises the mind-element (Table I, 39, 55) 





VINNANA-TTHITI | 199 


performing the function of ‘receiving’ (sampaticchana) the object of that 
consciousness... 


“Immediately thereafter there arises... the mind-consciousness-element 
(Table I, 40, 41, 56), while ‘investigating (santirana) the object received by 
the mind-element.... 


“Immediately thereafter there arises the functional, rootless mind- 
consciousness-element (Table I, 71), accompanied by indifference, while 
performing the function of ‘determining’ (votthapana) the object... 


“Now, if the object is large, then immediately afterwards there flash forth 
six or seven ‘impulsive moments’ (javana-citta), constituted by one of the 
eight wholesome, or twelve unwholesome, or nine functional classes of 
consciousness (Table I, 1—8; 22-23; 72-80). 


“Now, if at the end of the impulsive moments, the object at the five sense- 
doors is very large, and at the mind-door clear, then there arises, once 
or twice, one of the eight root-accompanied, karma resultant classes of 
consciousness (Table I, 42-49) of the sense-sphere, or one of the three 
rootless karma resultant mind-consciousness-elements (Table I, 40, 41, 56)... 
Because this consciousness after the vanishing of the impulsive moments, 
possesses the faculty continuing with the object of the subconsciousness, 
taking the object of the subconsciousness as its own object, therefore it 
is called ‘registering’ (tadarammana, lit. ‘that object’, or “having that as 
object’)” (Vism XIV, 115ff.). 


If, however, the sense-object is weak, then it reaches merely the stage of 
‘impulsion’ (javana), or of determining (votthapana); if very weak, only an 
excitation of the subconsciousness takes place. The process of the inner or 
mind-consciousness, i.e., without participation of the five physical senses, 
is as follows: in the case that the mind-object entering the mind-door is 
distinct, then it passes through the stages of ‘advertence at the mind-door’ 
(manodvaravajjana), the ‘impulsive stage’ and the ‘registering stage’, before 
finally sinking into the subconscious stream. See citta-vithi. 


Literature: Aids to the Abhidhamma Philosophy, by Dr. C. B. Dharmasena 
(with colour chart of the Cognitive Series; Wheel 63/64). The Psychology 
and Philosophy of Buddhism, by Dr. W. E Jayasuriya (Buddhist Missionary 
Society, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia). 


vifífíanaficayatana: ‘sphere of boundless consciousness’, is a term for the 
second meditative absorption in the immaterial sphere (see jhàna, 6). 


vififidna-tthiti: ‘abodes or supports of consciousness’. The texts describe 
seven such abodes (e.g. AN 7:41): 


(1) “There are beings who are different in body and different in perception, 
such as men, some heavenly beings, and some beings living in states of 
suffering (see apdya). This is the first abode of consciousness. 


(2) "There are beings who are different in body but equal in perception, such 
as the first-born gods of the Brahma-world (see deva II). This is the second 
abode of consciousness. 


(3) "There are beings who are equal in body but different in perception, 





200 | VINNATTI 


such as the Radiant Gods (Abhassara-deva). This is the third abode of 
consciousness. 


(4) “There are beings who are equal in body and equal in perception, such 
as the All-illuminating Gods (Subhakinha-deva). This is the fourth abode of 
consciousness. 


(5) “There are beings... reborn in the sphere of boundless space. This is the 
fifth abode of consciousness. 


(6) “There are beings... reborn in the sphere of boundless consciousness. 
This is the sixth abode of consciousness. 


(7) There are beings... reborn in the sphere of nothingness. This is the 
seventh abode of consciousness” 


About the three last-named spheres, see jhdna (5-7). See sattāvāsa. 


In DN 33 there are mentioned four vififidna-tthiti, apparently in the sense 
of ‘bases’ of consciousness, namely: corporeality, feeling, perception, mental 
formations, which in SN 22:53 are further explained. 


Vififiatti: (lit. ‘making known’) ‘intimation’, is an Abhidhamma term for 
bodily expression (kaya-vififiatti) and verbal expression (vact-vififiatti), both 
belonging to the corporeality-group. They are produced by the co-nascent 
volition, and are therefore, as such, purely physical and not to be confounded 
with karma (q.v.), which as such is something mental. See Kath 80, 100, 101, 
103, 194 (see Guide Ch. V). 


“One speaks of “bodily expression’, because it makes known an intention 
by means of bodily movement, and can itself be understood by the bodily 
movement which is said to be corporeal. 


“Verbal expression’ is so called because it makes known an intention by 
means of a speech-produced noise" (Vism XIV). 


Source note: Kaya-vififíatti and vaci-vifiiatti, occur for the first time in 
Dhs ($8 665, 718) of the Abhidhamma Canon. 


vipacitafifiü (or vipañcitaññū): ‘one who realises the truth after 
explanation.' Thus is called one who realises the truth only after detailed 
explanation of that which already had been said to him in a concise form. 
See ugghatitafifiü. 


vipaka: 'karma result, is any karmically (morally) neutral mental 
phenomenon (e.g. bodily agreeable or painful feeling, sense-consciousness, 
etc.), which is the result of wholesome or unwholesome volitional action 
(karma, q.v.) through body, speech or mind, done either in this or some 
previous life. Totally wrong is the belief that, according to Buddhism, 
everything is the result of previous action. Never, for example, is any 
karmically wholesome or unwholesome volitional action the result of 
former action, being in reality itself karma. On this subject see titthdyatana, 
karma, Table I; Fund Ch. II. See AN 3:101; Kath 162 (Guide Ch. V § 117, 
167). 


VIPASSANA | 201 





Karma-produced (kammaja or kamma-samutthana) corporeal things are 
never called kamma-vipdka, as this term may be applied only to mental 
phenomena. 


vipaka-paccaya: ‘karmaresultcondition’ is one of the twenty-four conditions 
(paccaya, q.v.). 


vipallasa: ‘perversions’ or distortions ."Therearefourperversions whichmay 
be either of perception (safifia-vipallasa), of consciousness (citta-vipallasa) 
or of views (ditthi-vipallasa). And which are these four? To regard what is 
impermanent (anicca) as permanent; what is painful (dukkha) as pleasant (or 
happiness-yielding); what is without a self (anattd) as a self; what is impure 
(ugly: asubha) as pure or beautiful" (AN 4:49). See Manual of Insight, by Ledi 
Sayadaw (Wheel 31/32). 


“Of the perversions, the following are eliminated by the first path-knowledge 
(sotapatti): the perversions of perception, consciousness and views, that 
the impermanent is permanent and what is not a self is a self; further, the 
perversion of views that the painful is pleasant, and the impure is pure. By 
the third path-knowledge (anagamita) are eliminated: the perversions of 
perception and consciousness that the impure is pure. By the fourth path- 
knowledge (arahatta) are eliminated the perversions of perception and 
consciousness that the painful is pleasant" (Vism XXII, 68). 


viparinamanupassana: ‘contemplation of change’ (of all things), is one ofthe 
eighteen chief kinds of insight (vipassana, q.v.). 


vipassana: ‘insight’, is the intuitive light flashing forth and exposing 
the truth of the impermanence, the suffering, and the impersonal and 
unsubstantial nature of all corporeal and mental phenomena of existence. 
It is insight-wisdom (vipassana-pafifia) that is the decisive liberating 
factor in Buddhism, though it has to be developed along with the two 
other trainings in morality and concentration. The culmination of insight 
practice (see visuddhi VI) leads directly to the stages of holiness (see 
visuddhi VII). 


Insight is not the result of a mere intellectual understanding, but is won 
through direct meditative observation of one's own bodily and mental 
processes. In the commentaries and the Visuddhimagga, the sequence 
in developing insight meditation is given as follows: 1. discernment of 
the corporeal (ripa), 2. of the mental (náma), 3. contemplation of both 
(náma-rüpa; i.e., of their pairwise occurrence in actual events, and their 
interdependence), 4. both viewed as conditioned (application of dependent 
origination, paticca-samuppáda), 5. application of the three characteristics 
(impermanence, etc.) to mind-and-body-cum-conditions. 


The stages of gradually growing insight are described in the nine insight- 
knowledges (vipassana-fiana), constituting the sixth stage of purification, 
beginning with the 'knowledge of rise and fall and ending with the 
'adaptation to Truth'. For details, see visuddhi VI and Vism XXI. 





202 | VIPASSANA-YANIKA 


Eighteen chief kinds of insight-knowledge (or principal insights, mahd- 
vipassana) are listed and described in Vism XXII, 113:(1) contemplation 
of impermanence (aniccdnupassanda), (2) of suffering (dukkhdnupassanda), 
(3) of no self (anattanupassanda), (4) of aversion (nibbidanupassana). (5) of 
detachment (viraganupassaná), (6) of extinction (nirodhanupassana), (7) of 
abandoning (patinissagganupassand), (8) of waning (khayanupassana), (9) 
of vanishing (vayanupassaná), (10) of change (viparinamanupassaná), (11) 
of the unconditioned (or signless, animittanupassand), (12) of desirelessness 
(appanihitanupassana), (13) of emptiness (sufifiatanupassaná), (14) insight 
into phenomena which is higher wisdom (adhipafifia-dhamma-vipassaná), 
(15) knowledge and vision according to reality (yathabhüta-fanadassana), 
(16) contemplation of misery (or danger, ádinavanupassaná), (17) reflecting 
contemplation (patisankhanupassand), (18) contemplation of turning away 
(vivattanupassana). 

Through these 18, the adverse ideas and views are overcome, for which 
reason this way of overcoming is called ‘overcoming by the opposite’ 
(tadanga-pahàna, overcoming this factor by that). Thus (1) dispels the idea 
of permanence. (2) the idea of happiness, (3) the idea of self, (4) lust, (5) 
greed, (6) origination, (7) grasping, (8) the idea of compactness, (9) karma- 
accumulation, (10) the idea of lastingness, (11) the conditions, (12) delight, 
(13) adherence, (14) grasping and adherence to the idea of substance, (15) 
adherence to delusion (regarding the ego and the world), (16) adherence to 
reliance (on formations), (17) thoughtlessness, (18) dispels entanglement 
and clinging. 

Insight may be either mundane (/okiya, q.v.) or supermundane (/okuttara, 
q.v.). Supermundane insight is of three kinds: (1) joined with one of the 
four supermundane paths, (2) joined with one of the fruitions of these paths, 
(3) regarding the extinction, or rather suspension, of consciousness (see 
nirodha-samapatti). See samatha-vipassaná, visuddhi, I-VII. 


Literature: Manual of Insight, by Ledi Sayadaw (Wheel 31/32). Practical 
Insight Meditation, Progress of Insight, both by Mahasi Sayadaw (BPS). 
The Experience of Insight, by Joseph Goldstein (BPS). 


Source note: Vipassand is frequently found in the older Sutta texts 
(e.g. AN 2:32; SN 45:159), also together with samatha. The nine and 
eighteen insight-knowledges (vipassand-fidna and mahd-vipassanda), 
however, occur in the Sutta Pitaka only in the Nanakatha of the 
Patisambhidamagga, where they are enumerated and explained, 
though without any group name being attached to them. 


vipassana-yanika: sukkha-vipassaka (q.v.). 
vipassanüpakkilesa: ‘imperfections of insight’; see visuddhi. 


Source note: The group of ten is mentioned for the first time in Patis II, 
102, and it is said that the mind may become defiled thereby (Kilissati), 
but the above term is not used for the ten. This is probably done for the 
first time in Vism XX. 





VISUDDHI | 203 


vipatti: ‘aberration’ or ‘deviation’, may be: deviation from morality (sila- 
vipatti), or deviation from understanding (ditthi-vipatti). 


“To deviate in deeds, or in words, or in both deeds and words: this is called 
deviation from morality. 


“Alms and offerings are useless, there is no fruit and result of good and bad 
actions, there are no such things as this and the next life’... Such wrong views 
are called deviation from understanding.” (Pug 67, 68) 


vippayutta-paccaya: ‘dissociation’, is one of the twenty-four conditions 
(paccaya, q.v.). 


viraga: ‘fading away’, detachment; absence of lust, dispassionateness. 
Appears frequently together with nirodha, ‘cessation’ (1) as a name for 
Nibbana, (2) in the contemplations (a) forming the fourth tetrad in the 
exercises in mindfulness of breathing (see Gndpdna-sati 14), (b) of the 
eighteen principal insights (No. 5); see vipassand. 


According to the Commentaries, it may mean (1) the momentary destruction 
of phenomena, or (2) the ultimate ‘fading away’, i.e., Nibbana. In the 
aforementioned two contemplations, it means the understanding of both, 
and the path attained by such understanding. 


viraganupassana: ‘contemplation of fading away’; see virdga. 


virati: the three ‘abstentions’ or abstinences, are: abstention from wrong 
speech, wrong (bodily) action and wrong livelihood; corresponding to 
right speech, action and livelihood of the Eightfold Path (see magga, 3-5). 
By abstention is not simply meant the non-occurrence of the evil things 
in question, but the deliberate abstaining therefrom, whenever occasion 
arises. They belong to the ‘secondary’ (not constant) mental concomitants 
obtaining in lofty consciousness (see Table II). See sila. 


virility: see bhava. 


viriya: ‘energy’, lit. ‘virility’, ‘manliness’ or ‘heroism’ (from vira, man, 
hero; Lat. vir; virtus), is one of the five spiritual faculties and powers 
(see bala), one of the seven factors of enlightenment (see bojjhariga) and 
identical with right effort of the Eightfold Path (see magga). For further 
explanations, see padhüna. 


viriya-sambojjhanga: ‘energy as a factor of enlightenment’, is one of the 
seven factors of enlightenment (bojjhanga, q.v.). 


virtue: see sila. 


visesa-bhagiya-sila (-samadhi, -pafifia): ‘morality (concentration, wisdom) 
connected with progress’. For details, see hanabhagiya-sila. 


visible object: see ayatana. 


visuddhi: ‘purification’, purity. The ‘seven stages of purification’ (satta- 
visuddhi) form the substructure of Upatissas Vimutti-Magga (The Path 
To Freedom), preserved only in Chinese, as well as of Buddhaghosa's 





204 | VISUDDHI 


monumental work, Visuddhi-Magga (The Path of Purification), based on 
the former work. 


The only place in the Canon where these seven kinds of purification are 
mentioned is MN 24, “The Simile of the Stage-coach" (see PD § 64), 
wherein their purpose and goal are illustrated. There it is said that the real 
and ultimate goal does not consist in purification of morality, or of mind, 
or of view, etc., but in total deliverance and extinction. Now, just as one 
mounts the first coach and travels to the second coach, then mounts the 
second coach and travels with it to the third coach, etc., in exactly the 
same way the goal of (I) the purification of morality (sila-visuddhi) is (II) 
the purification of mind (citta-visuddhi); its goal: (III) the purification of 
view (ditthi-visuddhi); its goal: (IV) the purification by overcoming doubt 
(kankhavitarana-visuddhi); its goal: (V) the purification by knowledge and 
vision of what is path and non-path (maggamagga-fianadassana-visuddhi); 
its goal: (VI) the purification by knowledge and vision of the path- 
progress (patipada-fianadassana-visuddhi); its goal: (VII) the purification 
of knowledge and vision (fdnadassana-visuddhi); but the goal of this 
purification is deliverance freed from all clinging. 


(D 

“Purification of morality (sila-visuddhi) consists of the fourfold purity 
of morality (catu-pdrisuddhi-sila), namely: restraint with regard to the 
Disciplinary Code(patimokkhasamvara-sila),sense-restraint(indriyasamvara- 
sila), purity of livelihood (ajivaparisuddhi-sila), morality with regard to the 
four requisites (paccaya-sannissita-sila)" (Vism XVIII). On these four terms, 
see sila. In the case of a layman, it entails the observance of whatever moral 
rules (5 or more) he has taken upon himself. 


(II) 
“Purification of mind (citta-visuddhi) is a term for the eight attainments 
(= absorptions: jhdna, q.v.), as well as for neighbourhood-concentration 
(upacadra-samadhi; see samadhi).” (ibid.). 


(III) 


“By purification of view (ditthi-visuddhi) is meant the understanding, 
according to reality, of mind and corporeality (nama-rüpa, q.v.)... which 
is founded on undeludedness (wisdom) as base, and which in manifold 
ways determines mind and corporeality after overcoming all belief in a 
personality (atta: self, ego.).” (ibid.). 


(IV) 
“By purification by overcoming doubt (karkha-vitarana-visuddhi) is meant 
the understanding which, by grasping the conditions of this mind and 
corporeality, has escaped from all doubt with regard to the three times (past, 
present, future)." (ibid. XIX) 


(V) 


“By purification by knowledge and vision of what is path and non-path 
(maggàámagga-fianadassana-visuddhi) is meant that understanding which 





VISUDDHI | 205 


knows the right path from the wrong path: ‘This is the right path, that the 
wrong path.” (ibid. XX) 


In order to attain this fifth stage of purification, one at first should develop 
methodical insight (naya-vipassana), i.e., through contemplation of the five 
groups of existence (khandha, q.v.). For whosoever does not yet possess a 
perfectly developed insight, to him such phenomena as effulgence of light, 
etc. (see below), arising during insight, may become impediments in the 
three kinds of full understanding here considered (see parififia). 


"As soon as the manifold ways and characteristics of the four Truths (sacca) 
and dependent origination (paticca-samuppdda) have become clear to the 
meditating disciple, he says to himself: "Thus do these things never before 
arisen arise, and having arisen they disappear again. Thus do the formations 
of existence ever and again arise as something quite new. But not only are 
they something new, they are moreover also of limited duration, like a dew- 
drop at sunrise, like a bubble, like a line drawn with a stick in the water, like 
a mustard seed placed on the point of an arrow, or like a flash of lightning. 
Also as something unsubstantial and empty do they appear, as jugglery, as a 
mirage... Merely something subject to vanishing arises, and having arisen 
disappears again.” 


During such insight practice, however, may arise the ten imperfections (or 
defilements) of insight (vipassanüpakkilesa): effulgence of light (obhasa), 
knowledge (/ana), rapture (piti), tranquillity (passaddhi), happiness 
(sukha), determination (adhimokkha), energy (paggaha), awareness 
(upatthana), equanimity (upekkha), delight (nikanti). See Vism XX, 105ff. 
Excepting the last one, ‘delight’, they are not imperfections or defilements 
in themselves, but may become a basis for them through the arising of pride 
or delight or by a wrong conclusion that one of the holy paths has been 
attained. He, however, who is watchful and experienced in insight practice, 
will know that these states of mind do not indicate attainment of the true 
path, but are only symptoms or concomitants of insight meditation. 


“Thus far the meditating disciple has determined three of the truths, namely 
while determining the corporeal and mental phenomena he has, through 
purification of view (ditthi-visuddhi), determined the ‘truth of suffering’. 
While grasping the conditions he has, through purification by overcoming 
doubt (kankhd-vitarana-visuddhi), determined the ‘truth of the origin of 
suffering’. While determining the right path, he has, through purification 
by knowledge and vision of what is path and non-path (maggamagga- 
fianadassana-visuddhi), determined the ‘truth of the path’ (leading to the 
extinction of suffering).” 


(VD 
Purification by knowledge and vision of the path-progress (patipada- 
fianadassana-visuddhi) is the insight perfected in eight kinds of knowledge, 
together with the ninth knowledge, the ‘knowledge adapting itself to truth’. 


By the eight kinds of knowledge are here meant the following, which are 
freed from defilements, follow the right process, and are considered as 
insight, namely: 





206 | VISUDDHI 


(1) knowledge consisting in contemplation of rise and fall 
(udayabbayGnupassand-idna), 


(2) in contemplation of dissolution (bhanganupassana-fiána), 

(3) in awareness of terror (or the fearful) (bhayatüpatthana-fiana), 
(4) in contemplation of misery (adinavàánupassana-fiana), 

(5) in contemplation of aversion (nibbidàanupassana-fiana), 

(6) in the desire for deliverance (muccitu-kamyata-nana), 

(7) in reflecting contemplation (patisankhünupassanà-iiána), 


(8) in equanimity regarding all formations of existence 
(sankharupekkha-fiana), which is followed by 


(9) in adaptation to truth (saccanulomika-fiana). 


(1) consists in the meditative observation of the three characteristics of 
existence (impermanence, suffering, no self) in one's own bodily and mental 
processes. As long as the mind is still disturbed by the ten imperfections (see 
V), the three characteristics will not become fully clear in their true nature. 
Only when the mind is free from these imperfections can the characteristics 
be observed clearly. 


(2) When through such repeated practice, knowledge and mindfulness 
have grown keen and the bodily and mental formations become apparent 
quickly at that stage the phase of dissolution of these formations will 
become prominent. 


"Consciousness with (e.g.) materiality as its object arises and dissolves. 
Having reflected on that object, he contemplates the dissolution of 
(reflecting) consciousness." (Patis I, 57, quoted in Vism XXI, 11). 


The eight blessings of this knowledge are: abandoning the belief in 
eternal existence (bhava-ditthi), giving up attachment to life, constant 
right application (of mind to meditative endeavour), a purified livelihood, 
overcoming of anxiety, absence of fear, acquisition of forbearance and 
gentleness, conquest of discontent and sensual delight (Vism XXI, 28). 


(3) Knowledge consisting in awareness of terror (or fearfulness) is the 
seeing of terror in the conditions as well as the continuity of existence. For 
whoso considers the formations as impermanent, to him the conditions of 
existence (i.e., the karma-formations producing ever new existence) appear 
as terror, as driving towards death. Whoso considers the formations as 
misery, to him the continuity of existence appears as terror, as something 
oppressive. Whoso considers the formations as impersonal, to him the 
karma-formations, as well as the continuity of existence, appear as terror, 
as an empty village, as a mirage, etc. 


(4) Contemplation of misery (or danger) is another aspect of the awareness 
of terror: ‘The origin (of existence) is terror... continuance of existence is 
terror... arising is suffering’, such understanding in the awareness of terror 
is the knowledge of misery. ‘Non-arising is bliss’, this is knowledge of the 
peaceful state (Patis I, 59); i.e., the no-more-arising is safety, is happiness, 
is Nibbana. 





VISUDDHI | 207 


(5) Contemplation of aversion means: aversion for all formations as terror, 
therefore its name ‘awareness of terror’ has come into use. Because it has 
made known the misery of all these formations, therefore it has received 
the name of ‘contemplation of misery’ (ddinavdnupassand). Because it 
has arisen through aversion for those formations, therefore it is known as 
‘contemplation of aversion’ (nibbidünupassaná). 


(6) Knowledge consisting in the desire for deliverance means: the desire for 
freedom and escape from all formations of existence. For feeling aversion for 
all formations, becoming weary of them, finding no more delight in them, 
the mind does not cling to a single one of all these formations. 


(7) Reflecting contemplation is the repeated meditative discernment of 
the formations of existence, attributing to them the three characteristics of 
existence, with the desire to find deliverance from all forms of existence. 


(8) Equanimity regarding all formations: “When the meditator (through 
reflecting contemplation) has discerned the formations by applying the 
three characteristics to them and sees them as void, he abandons both 
terror and delight, and becomes indifferent and equanimous with regard to 
all formations; he neither takes them as I nor as ‘mine’; he is like a man who 
has divorced his wife” (Vism XXI, 61). 


Now, while continuing to contemplate the three characteristics of existence 
and perceiving the tranquil lot of Nibbana as the peace, this equanimity- 
knowledge becomes the triple gateway to liberation. As it is said (Patis II, 
p. 48): 

“Three gateways to liberation (vimokkha-mukha; see vimokkha I) lead to 
escape from the world, namely: that the mind is contemplating all formations 
as limited, and is rushing forward to the conditionless element (animitta- 
dhátu); that the mind is stirred with regard to all formations of existence, 
and is rushing forward to the desireless element (appanihita-dhatu); that the 
mind sees all things as something foreign, and is rushing forward to the void 
element (suññatā-dhātu).” 


At this stage, and through the triple gateway, the diversification of path 
attainment takes place, according to the seven kinds of noble persons 
(ariya-puggala, q.v.); on this see Vism XXI, 74ff. 


The sixth, seventh, and eighth knowledges, according to Vism XXI, form 
really only one single knowledge in its first, middle, and final stages of 
development. This knowledge is also known as the 'insight leading to path 
ascent’ (vutthana-gamini-vipassand, q.v.). 

(9) Adaptation to truth (or conformity with truth) is called that knowledge 
which, while contemplating impermanence, etc. adapts itself to the 
preceding eight kinds of insight-knowledge, as well as to the immediately 
following supermundane path and to the thirty-seven elements pertaining to 
enlightenment (bodhipakkhiya-dhamma, q.v.). It is identical with adaptation- 
knowledge (anuloma-fiana). 

“Whosoever has cultivated, developed, and frequently practised 
‘equanimity regarding all formations’ in him arises very strong faith known 





208 | VISUDDHI 


as determination (adhimokkha-saddhà) and his energy is better exerted, his 
mindfulness better established, his mind better concentrated, and a still 
stronger ‘equanimity regarding the formations’ arises. ‘Now the path will 
reveal itself’, thus thinking, the meditator contemplates with his equanimity- 
knowledge all formations as impermanent, etc., and thereafter that 
knowledge sinks into the subconscious stream of existence (see bhavanga- 
sota). Immediately afterwards there arises advertence at the mind-door 
(see vififiana-kicca). And just like equanimity-knowledge, the adaptation- 
knowledge, too, takes as its object the formations, regarding them as 
something impermanent, miserable and impersonal. Thereupon, while 
continuing the uninterrupted continuity of consciousness (cifta-santati), 
there arises the first impulsive moment (javana, q.v.), called ‘preparation’ 
(parikamma), taking the same formations as object. Immediately thereafter, 
with the same formations as object, there arises the second impulsive 
moment, known as ‘access’ (upacára). And again immediately after that, 
there arises the impulsive moment called ‘adaptation’ (anuloma)." 


(VID 


Purification of knowledge and vision (/anadassana-visuddhi) is the 
knowledge associated with any of the four kinds of supermundane path- 
consciousness (see ariya-puggala). 


"Immediately upon this adaptation-knowledge there arises the 
‘maturity-knowledge’ (gotrabhii-fidna,; see gotrabhi) taking as object 
the Unconditioned, the standstill of existence, the absence of becoming, 
cessation, Nibbana, while at the same time transcending the rank (gotta = 
gotra: lineage), designation and plane of the worldling (puthujjana, q.v.), 
and entering the rank, designation and plane of the Noble Ones (ariya), 
being the first turning towards Nibbana as object, the first thinking of it, 
the first concentration on it, and the condition for the path... forming the 
culmination of insight, and never as such coming back again. 


“As the immediate continuation following upon that maturity knowledge 
(gotrabhii-fidna), there arises the first path-consciousness (stream-entry) 
forever destroying the first three of the ten fetters of existence (samyojana, 
q.V.), and closing the entrance to the lower worlds. Immediately after this 
path-knowledge, there arise, as its result, two or three path-produced states 
of consciousness, the fruitional consciousness (phala-citta). 


Immediately after the sinking of this consciousness into the subconscious 
stream of existence, the retrospective knowledge (paccavekkhana-fiana, q.v.) 
arises, having the path-consciousness as its object" (Vism XXI). For the three 
higher paths, see ariya-puggala. 


Each of the four kinds of path-consciousness performs at the one and 
the same time four functions, namely: the function of full understanding 
(pariññā, q.v.) of suffering, the function of overcoming (pahana, q.v.) the 
origin of suffering, the function of realising (sacchi-kiriya) the extinction 
of suffering, the function of developing (bhavaná, q.v.) the supermundane 
Noble Eightfold Path (magga, q.v.). 





VIVEKA | 209 


See Path of Purification, by Buddhaghosa, translated by Nanamoli (BPS); 
Path of Freedom, by Upatissa (BPS). 


vitakka: ‘thought’, ‘thought-conception’, is one of the ‘secondary’ (not 
constant) mental concomitants (see Table II), and may be either karmically 
wholesome, unwholesome or neutral. “There are three karmically 
unwholesome (akusala) thoughts: sensuous thought (kama-vitakka), hating 
thought (byadpdada-vitakka), and cruel thought (vihimsd-vitakka). There are 
three karmically wholesome (kusala) thoughts: thought of renunciation 
(nekkhamma-vitakka), of hatelessness (avydpdda-vitakka), of not harming 
(avihimsa-vitakka)." The latter three constitute ‘right thought’, the second link 
of the Eightfold Path (see magga 2). 


See MN 20; translated in The Removal of Distracting Thoughts—Vitakka- 
santhàna Sutta (Wheel 21). 


vitakka-vicara: ‘thought-conception and discursive thinking (or ‘applied 
and sustained thought’) are verbal functions (vaci-sankhdra; see sankhàra) 
of the mind, the so-called ‘inner speech’ (parole intérieure). They are 
constituents of the first absorption (see jhdna), but absent in the higher 
absorptions. 

(1) "Thought-conception (vitakka) is the laying hold of a thought, giving it 
attention. Its characteristic consists in fixing the consciousness to the object. 
(2) “Discursive thinking (vicdra) is the roaming about and moving to and fro 
of the mind... It manifests itself as continued activity of mind" (Vism IV). 


Vitakka is compared with the striking against a bell, vicdra with its 
resounding; vitakka with the seizing of a pot, vicara with wiping it. (See 
Vism IV, 89) 


vitality: jivitindriya; see indriya, khandha  (corporeality, mental 
formations), Table II. 


vithi (citta-vithi): ‘process of consciousness’; see vififidna-kicca. 


vivatta: ‘absence of the cycle of existence’ (vatta, q.v.), standstill of existence, 
is a term for Nibbana (q.v.). 


Source note: As a name for Nibbana, the term is found only in the 
Commentaries. 

vivatta-kappa: see kappa. 

vivattanupassana: ‘contemplation of the turning away’, is one of the eighteen 


chief kinds of insight (vipassana, q.v.). 


Source note: Is already mentioned in Patis, together with the remaining 
seventeen kinds of vipassand. It is not found in the old texts. 


viveka: ‘detachment’, seclusion, is according to the Niddesa, of three kinds: 
(1) bodily detachment (kaya-viveka), i.e., abiding in solitude free from 
alluring sensuous objects; (2) mental detachment (citta-viveka), i.e., the inner 





210 | VIVEKA-SUKHA 


detachment from sensuous things; (3) detachment from the substrata of 
existence (upadhi-viveka). 


In the description of the first absorption, the words “detached from sensuous 
things” (vivicc’ eva kamehi) refer, according to Vism (IV, 83, 93), to ‘bodily 
detachment’; the words “detached from karmically unwholesome things” 
(vivicca akusalehi dhammehi) refer to ‘mental detachment’; the words “born 
of detachment” (vivekaja), to the absence of the five hindrances. 


viveka-sukha: ‘happiness of detachment’, or aloofness (see viveka). 
“Whoso is addicted to society and worldly bustle, he will not partake of 
the happiness of renunciation, detachment, peace and enlightenment” 
(AN 7:86). 


vodana: ‘cleansing’, may refer either to (1) morality (sila), (2) concentration 
(samadhi), or (3) wisdom (paññā). 


(1) “Cleansing of morality takes place in two ways: by understanding the 
misery of moral deviation (sila-vipatti; see vipatti) and by understanding the 
blessing of moral perfection (sila-sampatti)” (see Vism I). 


(2) Cleansing of concentration is concentration connected with progress 
(visesa-bhágiya-samüdhi; see hdna-bhagiya). If, for example, one has 
entered the first absorption, and sensuous perceptions and reflections arise, 
in that case there is concentration connected with decline... If, however, 
perceptions and reflections free from thought-conception and discursive 
thinking (second jhdna, q.v.) arise, in that case there is concentration 
connected with progress. 


(3) Cleansing, with reference to wisdom, is identical with the *insight leading 
to the (path) ascent’ (vutthüna-gàmini-vipassand, q.v.), which arises at the 
stage of ‘purification by knowledge and vision of the path-progress’ (see 
visuddhi VY), and is followed immediately by the maturity moment and the 
entrance into the supermundane paths. 


vohara-desana: ‘conventional exposition’, as distinguished from an 
explanation true in the highest sense (paramattha-desand, q.v.). It is also 
called sammuti-sacca (Skr samvrti). 


Source note: The terms vohdra-sacca, paramattha-sacca, sammuti- 
sacca, etc., belong as such to the commentarial literature, but their 
significance is clearly shown in the old Sutta texts, e.g. DN 9: loka- 
samanna, loka-vohara; further (DN 33): sammuti-fiana, etc. 


void-deliverance: see ceto-vimutti. 


vokara: ‘group (of existence)’, synonymous with khandha in the 
Abhidhamma, see pafíca-vokàra-bhava. 


Source note: Pafica-vokàra, catu-vokara, and eka-vokara (bhava), occur 
as technical terms only in the Abhidhamma (Vibh, Yam, Patth) and 
Commentaries, e.g. Vism, but their substance is an integral part of the 
Suttas. 





VYAPADA | 211 


volition: cetand (q.v.). 


votthapana-citta: ‘determining consciousness’, is that mind-element 
(functioning independently of karma; see Table I, 70) which in the process 
of sense-perception performs the function of determining the sense-object. 
It is one of the fourteen functions of consciousness (vififiána-kicca, q.v.). 


Source note: First found in the Commentaries; see citta-vithi. 


vutthana-gamini-vipassana: ‘insightleadingto(path) ascent’. Itis alsocalled 
‘cleansing’ (voddna, q.v.), and according to Patis II, 64, it is a term for three 
kinds of insight-knowledge, namely: knowledge consisting in the desire 
for deliverance (muccitu-kamyatad-ndna; see visuddhi VI, 6); reflecting- 
contemplation-knowledge (patisankhdnupassana-ndna; ibid. VI, 7); and 
knowledge consisting in equanimity regarding all formations (sankhar 
upekkha-ndna; see visuddhi VI, 8). 

It arises at the stage of ‘purification by knowledge and vision of the path- 
progress’ (see visuddhi VI), and is followed immediately by the maturity 
moment and the entrance into the supermundane paths. 


“Ascent’ (vutthdna) is the supermundane path (see ariya-puggala) since 
it rises above the object forming the external foundation (of insight; i.e., 
the external five groups of existence), in which object one's mind was 
absorbed, and also rises above one's own continuity (one’s own five groups 
of existence, or khandha, q.v.) together with its defilements. By reason of its 
leading upwards to the supermundane path, this insight is called ‘ascending 
insight'. That it passes on to the path: that is the meaning implied" (Vism 
XXI, 83ff.). 

Source note: The term is probably implied in Patis I, 60, under the name 

of vutthüna-vivattane fiána. 


vyapada: ‘ill will’, is a synonym of dosa (see miila); it is one of the five 
hindrances (nivarana, q.v.) and one of the ten fetters (samyojana, q.v.). 





212 | WATER-ELEMENT 


W 


water-element: àpo-dhátu; see dhatu. 
water-kasina, white-water-kasina, wind-water-kasina; see kasina. 
weighty karma: garuka-kamma; see karma. 

wheel of existence: see samsdra, vatta. 

wheel of the law: dhamma-cakka (q.v.). 

will: cetand (q.v.). 

wind-element: váyo-dhàtu; see dhátu. 

wisdom: paid (q.v.). 

woeful courses (of existence): duggati; see gati. 
world, the threefold: loka (q.v.). 

worldling: puthujjana (q.v.). 

worldly: lokiya (q.v.). 

worldly conditions, the eight: loka-dhamma (q.v.). 
world-period, formation, dissolution: see kappa. 
wrongnesses, the ten: micchattà (q.v.). 

wrong path: micchá-magga (q.v.). 


wrong understanding (or view), wrong thought, wrong speech, etc.: 
see micchà-magga. 





YAKKHA | 213 


Y 


yakkha: in popular belief, a kind of ghost, goblin, or ogre. 
Yama-deva: are a kind of heavenly beings of the sensuous world, see deva. 


yamaka-patihariya: ‘twin miracle’. “There the Perfect One performed the 
twin miracle unattainable to any disciple: from the upper part of his body 
a flame sprang forth, and from the lower part a stream of water, etc.” (Patis 
I, 125ff.). 


Source note: The term is first mentioned and described in Patis. 


yatha-bhüta-fiana-dassana: ‘the knowledge and vision according to 
reality’, is one of the eighteen chief kinds of insight (vipassand, q.v.). 


yathakammipaga-fiana: ‘knowledge of rebirth according to one's actions’; 
see abhififia (4). 


yathasanthatik'anga: ‘the practice of being satisfied with whatever dwelling’, 
is one of the ascetic means of purification; see dhutanga (12). 


yoga: ‘yokes, bonds’, is another name for the four cankers (Gsava, q.v.). 


yogavacara (= yogi): ‘one devoted to mental training,’ is in the 
Visuddhimagga the usual name for the disciple cultivating mental 
concentration. 


Source note: These two terms belong to the commentarial literature, 
but the first term appears also in the Milindapariha. 


yokes: yoga, q.v. 


yoni: ‘modes of generation.’ There are four modes: generation from the egg, 
from the mother’s womb, from moisture, and spontaneous birth (opapaátika, 
q.v.) in heaven, hell, etc. Explained in MN 12. 


yoniso manasikara: ‘thorough attention’ or ‘wise consideration’; 
see manasikara. 


youth-infatuation: see mada. 


yuganaddha: see samatha-vipassand, last paragraph. 





Appendix 


| 215 


Attempt at a chronological fixing of terms not found, or not found in this 
form or meaning, in the oldest parts of the Sutta Pitaka. 


akusala-sadharana- 
cetasika 

anantarika-kamma 

arammana 

avacara 

avajjana 

avyákata 

ayuhana 

bhava 

bhava 

bhavanga-sota, -citta 

carita 

cáritta- and varitta- 
sila 

cetasika 

citta-lahutà 

citta-vithi 

cuti-citta 

dhatu-vavatthàna 

dhutanga 

gotrabhü 

hasituppáda-citta 

iddhi 

indriya-samatta 

javana 

kalàpa 

kama 

kamma 

kammafiatà 

kammatthana 

katattü-kamma 

kaya-lahuta 

khana 

kilesa 

kiriya- (kiriya-, kriya-) 
citta 

lahutà, mudutà, 
kammannata 

manodvaravajjana 


muduta 
nana 
natthi-paccaya 
n'eva-sekha-n'üsekha 
Nibbana 
nimitta 
nissarana-pahàána 
nissaya, nissita 
niyama 
niyata-micchaditthi 
paccaya 
pdadaka-jjhana 
pagunnata 
pahana 
palibodha 
pafica-dváràvajjana 
paramattha 
parami, paramita 
paricchinnakasa 
pariyatti, patipatti, 
pativedha 
patipannaka 
patipatti 
patisandhi 
patisandhika 
pativedha 
pattidana 
rupa 
samadhi 
Sama-sist 
samatha-yànika 
sammasana 
sammuti 
sampaticchana-citta 
samutthana 
santana, santati 
santirana-citta 
sila 
sukkha-vipassaka 


tadarammana-citta 

tathata 

tatramajjhattata 

Theravada 

ujukata 

upacaya 

upada-rüpa 

varitta-sila 

vast 

vatthu 

vimokkha 

vififiatti 

vipassana 

vipassanüpakkilesa 

vivatta 

vivattanupassand 

vohàra-sacca 

vokàra 

votthapana-citta 

vutthana-gamini- 
vipassana 

yamaka-patihariya 

yogdavacara, yogi 





216 | 


TABLE I. CONSCIOUSNESS-GROUP 
(VINNANA-KKHANDHA) 


Consciousness, from the karmic or moral standpoint, may be classified as of 
eighty-nine kinds, as follows: 





KARMICALLY WHOLESOME (kusala) 





(1) Joyful, with knowledge, unprepared. (Imp.") 
(2) Joyful, with knowledge, prepared. (Imp.) 
(3) Joyful, without knowledge, unprepared. (Imp.) 
Sensuous (4) Joyful, without knowledge, prepared. (Imp.) 
Sphere (5) Indifferent, with knowledge, unprepared. (Imp.) 
(6) Indifferent, with knowledge, prepared. (Imp.) 
(7) Indifferent, without knowledge, unprepared. (Imp.) 
(8) Indifferent, without knowledge, prepared. (Imp.) 
(9) 1st Jnana (Imp.) 
Fine-material (10) 2nd Jhana (Imp.) 
Sphere (11) 3rd Jhana (Imp.) 

(Absorptions) | (15) 4th hana (Imp.) 
(13) 5th Jhana (Imp.) 
Immaterial | (14) “Boundless Space” (Imp.) 











( lum (15) *Boundless Consciousness" (Imp.) 
(16) “Nothingness” (Imp.) 
(17) “Neither-perception-nor-non-perception” (Imp.) 
(18) Path (-moment) of “stream-entry” (Imp.) 
Super- (19) Path (-moment) of “once-returning” (Imp.) 


mundane (20) Path (-moment) of “non-returning” (Imp.) 
(21) Path (-moment) of "arahatship" (Imp.) 
Total 21 kinds 

















*  [mp. = impulsion (javana), Adv. = advertence (dvajjana), Rec. = receiving (sam- 
paticchana), Reg. = registering (tadárammana), Inv. = investigating (santirana), 
R.S.D. = rebirth (patisandhi), subconsciousness (bhavariga), dying (cuti). 





| 217 





KARMICALLY UNWHOLESOME (akusala) 





Sensuous 
Sphere 


(22) 
(23) 
(24) 
(25) 
(26) 
(27) 
(28) 
(29) 


(30) 
(31) 


(32) 
(33) 


Rooted in Greed (lobha) 

Joyful, with evil view, unprepared. (Imp.) 
Joyful, with evil view, prepared. (Imp.) 

Joyful, without evil view, unprepared. (Imp.) 
Joyful, without evil view, prepared. (Imp.) 
Indifferent, with evil view, unprepared. (Imp.) 
Indifferent, with evil view, prepared. (Imp.) 
Indifferent, without evil view, unprepared. (Imp.) 
Indifferent, without evil view, prepared. (Imp.) 
Rooted in Hate (dosa) 

Sad, angry, unprepared. (Imp.) 

Sad, angry, prepared. (Imp.) 

Rooted in Delusion (moha) 

Indifferent and sceptical. (Imp.) 


Indifferent and restless. (Imp.) 





Fine-material 
Sphere 
(Absorptions) 





Immaterial 
Sphere 
(Absorptions) 





Supermundane 











Total 12 kinds 











218 | 





KARMICALLY NEUTRAL (avydkata) 
(a) karma results (vipaka) 





Sensuous Sphere 


Result of Wholesome Karma (with desirable objects): 


1. Without Root-cause 


(34-38) 


(39) 
(40) 


(41) 


(42-49) 


(50-54) 


(55) 
(56) 


Eye-, ear-, nose-, tongue-, (agreeable) body- 
consciousness. (Adv.*) 


Mind-element (mano-dhatu) (Rec.*) 
Joyful mind-consciousness-element (mano- 
vififíana-dhatu). (Inv.* Reg.*) 


Indifferent mind-consciousness-element 


(mano-vififiana-dhátu). (Inv. Reg.) 
2. With Root-cause 
= (1-8) (Reg. R.S.D.*) 


Result of Unwholesome Karma (with 
undesirable objects): 
Without Root-cause only 


Eye-, ear-, nose-, tongue-, (painful) body- 
consciousness. 


Mind-element (mzzano-dhàtu) (Rec.) 


Mind-consciousness-element (mano- 
vififíana-dhatu). 
(Inv. Reg. R.S.D.) 





Fine-material 
Sphere 
(Absorptions) 


(57) 
(58) 
(57) 
(58) 
(60) 
(61) 


= (9-13) (R.S.D.) 





Immaterial 
Sphere 
(Absorptions) 


(62) 
(63) 
(64) 
(65) 


r = (14-17) (R.S.D) 








Supermundane 





(66) Fruit (-moment) of “stream-entry” (Imp.) 
(67) Fruit (-moment) of “once-returning” (Imp.) 
(68) Fruit (-moment) of "nonreturning" (Imp.) 
(69) Fruit (-moment) of "arahatship" (Imp.) 








Total 36 kinds 








| 219 





KARMICALLY NEUTRAL (avyakata) 
(b) Independent functions (kriyda) 





1. Without Root-cause 
(70) Mind-element. (Adv: 5d) 


(71) Indifferent Mind-consciousness-element 
(Adv.) 


(72) Joyful mind- 
SensuousSphere consciousness- 


N 


element (Imp.) 


2. With Root-cause 
(73-80) = (1-8) (Imp.) Only in the Arahat 





Fine-material 
Sphere (81-85) = (9-13) (Imp.) 


























(Absorptions) 
Immaterial 
Sphere (86-89) = (14-17) (Imp.) 
(absorptions) 
Supermundane 
Total 20 kinds 
TABLE II. 


FORMATION-GROUP 
(SANKHARA-KKHANDHA) 


To this group belong fifty mental formations, of which eleven are general 


psychological elements, twenty-five lofty qualities, and fourteen karmically 
unwholesome qualities. 


Eleven GENERAL formations* 


(a) Five Primary ones (in all consciousness): 


Mental Impression (phassa) Concentration (samādhi) 
Volition (cetanda) Advertence (manasikara) 
Vitality (jivita) 


(b) Six Secondary ones (not in all consciousness): 





220 | 


Thought Conception (vitakka) ^ Energy (viriya) 
Discursive Thinking (vicdra) Interest (piti) 
Determination (adhimokkha) Intention (chanda) 


Twenty-five LOFTY formations 


(a) Primary ones (in all wholesome and its corresponding neutral 
consciousness): 


Faith (saddhà) 

Mindfulness (sati) 

Moral Shame (hiri) 

Moral Dread (ottappa) 

Greedlessness (alobha) 

Hatelessness (adosa) 

Equanimity (tatramajjhattata) 

Tranquillity of Spiritual Group (kaya-passaddhi) 
Tranquillity of Consciousness (citta-passaddhi) 
Agility of Spiritual Group (kaya-lahutà) 

Agility of Consciousness (citta-lahuta) 

Elasticity of Spiritual Group (kaya-mudutà) 
Elasticity of Consciousness (citta-mudutà) 
Adaptability of Spiritual Group (kaya-kammaíifiatà) 
Adaptability of Consciousness (citta-kammafifiatà) 
Proficiency of Spiritual Group (kaya-paguiifiata) 
Proficiency of Consciousness (citta-pāguññatā) 
Uprightness of Spiritual Group (kdya-ujukata) 
Uprightness of Consciousness (citta-ujukata) 


(b) Secondary ones (not in all lofty consciousness): 


3 Abstinences:* 

Abstinence from wrong bodily action 
Abstinence from wrong words 
Abstinence from wrong livelihood 


2 Boundless States* 

Compassion (karund) 

Sympathetic Joy (mudita) 

Non-delusion (amoha = paññā, knowledge) 





| 221 


Fourteen UNWHOLESOME formations 


(a) Four Primary ones (in all unwholesome consciousness): 


Delusion (moha) Lack of Moral Dread (anottappa) 
Lack of Moral Shame (ahirika) Unrest (uddhacca) 


(b) Ten Secondary ones (not in all unwholesome consciousness): 


4 Hateful Ones further: 

Hate (dosa) Greed (lobha) 

Envy (iss) Evil View (ditthi) 

Stinginess (macchariya) Conceit (māna) 

Worry (kukkucca)' Torpor (thina) 
Languor (middha)' 


Scepsis (vicikiccha)' 


TABLE III. 
COMBINATION OF THE TWO GROUPS 


KARMICALLY WHOLESOME 





(1) & (2) 11 General + 25 Lofty = 36 
(3) & (4) above 36 — Knowledge ? =35 
(5) & (6) above 36 — Interest =35 
(7) & (8) above 36 — Interest — knowledge = 34 
(9) and above 36 — 3 Abstinences = 33 
(10) the latter 33 — Thought-Conceptions = 32 
(11) the latter 32 — Discursive Thinking m3] 
(12) the latter 31 — Interest = 30 
(13) the latter 30 — 2 Boundless states = 28 


(14) to (17) the latter 28 Formations 
(18) to (21) = (9) to (13) but — 2 Boundless states + 3 Abstinences 


KARMICALLY UNWHOLESOME 





(22) 11 General + 4 Primary Unwholesome + Greed + Evil View =17 
(23) = (No. 22) + Torpor 3 ê & Languor * =19 


§ (—) is in this column everywhere used only as a minus sign. 





222 | 








(24) = (No. 22) - Evil View + Conceit = 17 
(25) = (No. 23) - Evil View + Conceit =19 
(26) = (No. 22) - Interest = 16 
(27) = (No. 23) - Interest =18 
(28) = (No. 24) - Interest -16 
(29) = (No. 25) - Interest =18 
(30) = (No. 22) - Interest — Greed — Evil View + 4 Hateful =18 
(31) = preceding, + Torpor * & Languor * = 20 


(32) 8 General (missing Interest, Determination, Intention) = 13 
+ 4 primary Unwholesome + Scepsis 


(33) = preceding, but Determination instead of Scepsis =13 


KARMICALLY NEUTRAL 





(a) Karma resultant 


(34) to (38) Five Primary General; Concentration Weak 


(50) to (54) Five Primary General; Concentration Weak 


(39) & (55) = preceding 5 + Thought Conception + Discursive =8 


(41) & (56) Thinking + Determination; Concentration weak 


(40) 9 General (missing: Energy and Intention; Concentration 


weak) 


(42) to (49) = (1) to (8), but — 2 Boundless states — 3 Abstinences 
(57) to (69) = (9) to (21) 


(b) Karmically Independent functions 


(70) = (39) 

(71) = 9 General (missing: Interest & Intention; Concentration = 9 
weak) 

(72) = 10 General (missing Intention) =10 


(73) to (80) = (1) to (8) — 3 Abstinences 
(81) to (89) = (9) to (17) 





| 223 


Works of the Author 


ENGLISH 


The Word of the Buddha. 14th Edition. Kandy 1967, BPS.— Abridged 
Students’ Edition, Colombo 1948, Y.M.B.A. 


Guide through the Abhidhamma Pitaka. 3rd Edition, 1971, BPS. 


Fundamentals of Buddhism. Four Lectures. 2nd Edition, 1956, Bauddha 
Sahitya Sabha (Lake House Bookshop, Colombo). 


Path to Deliverance. 2nd Edition, 1959. Bauddha Sahitya Sabha (Lake 
House Bookshop, Colombo). 


Karma and Rebirth. (Wheel 9) Kandy 1959, BPS. Republished as Wheel 
394/96. 


Influence of Buddhism on a People. (Bodhi Leaves A2), Kandy 1959, BPS. 
GERMAN 
Das Wort des Buddha. 1906 f., Verlag Christiani, Konstanz. 


Anguttara Nikáya (translation). Five vols., 1907f. 2nd revised edition 1969, 
Verlag M. DuMont Schauberg, Kóln. 


Milindapafiha (translation). Two vols., 606 pp., 1918f. 

Dhammapada. Pali text, metrical translation and commentary (in Ms.). 
Puggala-Pafifiatti (translation). 1910. 

Abhidhammattha-Sangaha (translation). (in Ms.). 

Visuddhi-Magga (translation). Konstanz 1952, Verlag Christiani. 
Führer durch das Abhidhamma-Pitaka. (in Ms.). 

Systematische Pali-Grammatik. (1911). 


Pali-Anthologie und Wörterbuch (Anthology and Glossary). Two vols. 
1928. 


Grundlehren des Buddhismus. (in Ms.). 
Pfad zur Erlósung. Konstanz 1956, Verlag Christiani. 


Buddhistisches Wórterbuch (Buddhist Dictionary). Konstanz, Verlag 
Christiani. 





224 | 


Des Buddha Weg zur Weisheit und Kommentar. Palitext, wortliche 
metrische Übersetzung und Kommentar zu der eltesten 
buddhistischen Spruchsammlung. Jhana Verlag, Oy-Mittelberg, 1992. 


Dhammapada, wortliche metrische Übersetzung der ültesten 
buddhistischen Spruchsammlung, Jhana Verlag, Oy-Mittelberg, 1995. 


Handbuch der buddhistischen Philosophie (Abhidhammatthasangaha). 


Übersetzt und erlüutert von Nyantiloka Mahathera, Oy-Mittelberg, 
1995, 157pp. (Jhana Verlag) 


FRENCH 


Vocabulaire Pali-Francaise des Termes Bouddhiques. French translation of 
the Buddhist Dictionary, by S. Karpeles. Paris 1961, Adyar. 


La Parole du Buddha. French translation of The Word of the Buddha. 
Paris, Adrien-Maisonneuve. 


PALI 


Sacca-Sangaha. Pali text of The Word of the Buddha, in Sinhala script. 
1914 (out of print). 


Buddha-Vacanam. Pali text of The Word of the Buddha, in Roman script. 
BPS. 


SINHALA 


Buddha Vacanaya: Sinhala translation of The Word of the Buddha. 
Rajagiriya (Sri Lanka), 1964, Ananda Semage. 


For a complete and updated bibliography, see The Life of Nyanatiloka Thera: 
The Biography of a Western Buddhist Pioneer, Nyanatiloka Thera & Hell- 
muth Hecker & Bhikkhu Nyanatusita, BPS, Kandy, 2008. 


ABOUT PARIYATTI 


Pariyatti is dedicated to providing affordable access to authentic teachings 
of the Buddha about the Dhamma theory (pariyatti) and practice (patipatti) 
of Vipassana meditation. A 501 (c)(3) nonprofit charitable organization since 
2002, Pariyatti is sustained by contributions from individuals who appreciate 
and want to share the incalculable value of the Dhamma teachings. We 
invite you to visit www.pariyatti.org to learn about our programs, services, 
and ways to support publishing and other undertakings. 


Pariyatti Publishing Imprints 


Vipassana Research Publications (focus on Vipassana as taught by S.N. 
Goenka in the tradition of Sayagyi U Ba Khin) 


BPS Pariyatti Editions (selected titles from the Buddhist Publication Society, 
copublished by Pariyatti in the Americas) 


Pariyatti Digital Editions (audio and video titles, including discourses) 


Pariyatti Press (classic titles returned to print and inspirational writing by 
contemporary authors) 


Pariyatti enriches the world by 
* disseminating the words of the Buddha, 
* providing sustenance for the seeker's journey, 


* illuminating the meditator's path. 


