Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 
कच्चायन पालिवेयाकरणम 


NGC ANS 
PALI GRAMMAR 


TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH WITH 
ADDITIONAL NOTES, SIMPLE EXPLANATIONS AND TABLES 


Volume 2 


By 
A.Thitzana 


This eBook is offered freely. If you wish, 
you may donate and help us continue offering our services. 


May you be happy! 


To make a donation, please visit: 
www.pariyatti.org 


PARIYATTI 


867 Larmon Road Onalaska, 
Washington 98570 USA 
360.978.4998 


www.pariyatti.org 





Pariyatti is a nonprofit organization dedicated to enriching 
the world by: 

** Disseminating the words of the Buddha 

E 


* Providing sustenance for the seeker's journey 
** Illuminating the meditator's path 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 
कच्चायन पालिव्याकरणां 
Kaccayana Pali Grammar 


Volume 2 


Translated into English with additional notes, 
simple explanations and tables 


By 
A. Thitzana 


iy. 
a W 


res 5? 


Pariyatti Press 


Pariyatti Press 
an imprint of 
Pariyatti Publishing 
www.pariyatti.org 


First edition 


O 2016 Pariyatti 


All rights reserved. No part of this book may be used or reproduced in 
any manner whatsoever without the written permission of the 
publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical 
articles and reviews. 


ISBN: 978-1-68172-037-1 
LCCN: 2016906544 


DEDICATION 
Yo me upajjayo asi, Asoka'ramamapako, 
Aggamaha pandita'bhi-dhajamaharatthaguru, 
Chattasangiti-ukkattho, Suriyo gunabanuma, 
Ta'maham abhipüjemi, Vyakaranena imina. 


Contents 


Preface ee D EU 1 
Preface to the Second Edition.................................... ecce. 7 
Introduction sucio ipee tare ratp vo ui bd ptr vn ना 10 
Pronunciation Guide .................................................***.०**. ० «> 51 
Guide to €-01]पा०$.........................................................*“*..«. 55 
Key 1101101117165::,:2:2:29222220142:294/:92242200 नन 59 
List of Abbreviations ...................................................*“.**““..«: 60 
Frequently Found १५/०॥त५..................................................... 65 
Suttakkama (Order of Suttas) ............................................. 69 
I. Sandhi Kap]. iopeceeperie be ono epos नन 117 
2. Nama Kappa «iori eoniseta ise unen es voiles का 183 
3. EIC CN CnrDMT m ——— À 373 
4. Samāsa 1९9]114....................................................*.*.***“:“*“*“. 443 
5. Taddhita ३९ ॥॥])19.............................................................. 495 
6. Akhyāta Kappa ................................................... ८८८८८८८. 575 
7. Kibbidhāna Kappa ......................................................... 685 
8; Unadi APIA uer m 763 
PLP POW A a 829 


Preface 
Preface 


A Wholesome Pursuit 

This work of translation was carried out with an aim and a noble 
desire to bridge the gap which naturally exists between the con- 
temporary man and an ancient sacred language known as "Pali". 
The language of Pali is like a gateway to the treasury of pro- 
found wisdom called "Tipitaka Pali canon" expounded by Bud- 
dha. The study of Pali, the spoken language of Buddha, is a 
worth-while and wholesome pursuit for anyone with a sincere 
heart and an inquiring intellectual mind whose apparent aim and 
purpose is to explore and understand Buddha's spoken words. 
By being able to understand His words, it will enrich 
knowledge and deepen one's wisdom thus leading to a much no- 
bler and more meaningful life. Understanding the words of 
Buddha will surely bring a person much closer to the noble mes- 
sage of Buddha in its original tone, on the first-hand basis of the 
speech as it was originally spoken by Him more than almost two 
thousand six hundred years ago. 


When I first taught Pali to some foreign students from 1997 to 
2005, using some well-written guide books on the Pali study, I 
found out that they can progress quite smoothly in the reading 
and understanding of the Pali passages. However, they usually 
make a number of recurrent mistakes in their writing exercises. 
Though most serious students are able to understand what they 
have learnt to some degree, they still find it quite challenging to 
write correctly and flawlessly. 


The areas of weakness for the majority of students is in using 
the correct form of words with the right inflection, verb forms in 
the right place and the usage of participles and gerunds in the 
correctly arranged sentences. Pali, as a matter of fact, is a highly 
inflective language based on its case and the role each word 
plays in a sentence of a contextual structure. Various word- 


1 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


formations such as nouns, verbs and other essential parts of the 
sentence too are quite variable based mainly on the case, tense 
and syntactical role of the word. Unless one clearly understands 
how each word is structured and how they are syntactically re- 
lated according to the role they play, one will not be able to gain 
mastery of the language and necessary skills in spite of making 
the best efforts in learning it. 


A Long-felt Need 

An earnest student with serious interest needs a very basic, thor- 
ough understanding and careful study about the structural pat- 
terns of words and their morphological process. This can be 
achieved only through studying its original grammatical text 
along with detailed explanations on the rules known as Suttas 
and the accompanying word-examples shown alongside in the 
Suttas. In other words, there is no replacement for an original 
ancient text with a ready-made, short-cut guide though it may 
fill some language-learning need but not in such a way as an 
original text can certainly do. An original grammar text written 
at a distant time when the ancient grammatical concepts and 
rules were conceptualized and formulated by the ancient sages, 
can clearly explain all aspects of the language and its grammar. 


The oldest Pali grammar widely used and still extant is the one 
supposedly written by the most Venerable Kaccayana. His 
grammar is a very-well written book, concise but lucid, compact 
with only six hundred and seventy-five Suttas!. It is complete as 


! There are 673 Suttas in most versions. In the earliest-known publications 
such as Emile Senart's edition (1871) and Kaccayana grammar published by 
Mahabodhi society (1901), Kaccayana and Kaccayana-vutti edited by Ole 
Holten Pind (published by Pali Text Society in 2013), there are 675 Suttas 
with two more Suttas in the fourth section, Nouns chapter. 

They are: (a) Obhavo kvaci yosu vakarassa (b) Bhadantassa bhaddanta, 
bhante which are also found in Rüpasiddhi text. In light of this finding, it has 


Preface 


it covers all areas of the grammatical importance, ideally suited 
for any serious students of Pali to study and master it within a 
short span of time. It is still used as a major popularly used 
grammatical text in countries such as Thailand, Myanmar and 
Sri Lanka where Buddhist scriptures are studied. 


To date, there have been two translations of the text. One is a 
French translation by M.E. Senart published in 1871. The other 
is an English translation of the Kaccayana's original Pali gram- 
mar text translated by Satis Chandra Achariya Vidyabhüshana, 
the Professor, Sanskrit College, Calcutta and published by the 
Mahabodhi Society in 1901. Each Suttas of the text were shown 
in archaic Devanagari-Pali characters along with French or Eng- 
lish translation of the Suttas and a few word examples. Both 
were nonetheless inaccessible to those who cannot read nor un- 
derstand the French and the old-style Devanagari characters. 


Although both translations are neither a thorough translation nor 
a detailed treatment of the complete text, they were indeed help- 
ful in providing some basically needed insights into grammar 
and served as useful guides and references for the students of 
Pali for many years since. 


There is a long-felt need to have a more thorough and complete 
English rendering of the great grammarian's work so that it can 
benefit all those studying Pali. This book is the first-ever attempt 
not only to translate all of the whole text but also to contempo- 
rize an ancient grammar and its contents for the contemporary 
world. I fervently hope that through such a detailed translation, 
it would surely be much more easier and more accessible to any 


to be logically assumed that there must have been 675 Suttas in the original 
text. The translation of these two Suttas are also shown in the footnote of this 
book in the fourth section of the Nouns chapter. 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


student, regardless of various language backgrounds with the aid 
of a translated grammatical text such as this. 


An Eternal Tribute 

Although this work is a not a groundbreaking work nor laying of 
a new foundation in the matters of Pali grammar, it is neverthe- 
less an important milestone in the Pali grammatical literature. I 
humbly hope that this translation work will take the study of Pali 
to a more higher dimension of advanced, in-depth study for all 
serious international students of Pali. It will thus greatly benefit 
the students of Pali in their study in many ways either as a basic 
companion guide or as an academic reference text at all times as 
long as their association with the Pali study is concerned. 


I had started this work of translation as a token of eternal tribute 
to my great preceptor, the most Venerable Sayadaw Bhaddanta 
Süriyabhivamsa (1879-1975), the founder of two great Maso- 
eyein (Asokarama) monasteries in Mandalay. He was also the 
chief presiding patriarch chairman of the great sixth Buddhist 
Synod held in 1954-56, as well as the founder of Paficanikaya 
Sasana Beikman monastery, Yangon, who has had nurtured me 
even while I was just a young novice. It is also a memorial trib- 
ute of deep gratitude to my late Pali teachers venerable Kan-oo 
Sayadaw U Kondafiiia, (Lhaw-gar, Pale township, Monywa) and 
Sayadaw U Nayakabhivarhsa, (Masoeyein Taik-thit Monastery, 
Mandalay), to whom I feel greatly indebted for all the grammat- 
ical knowledge I had acquired. It is through dedicated care and 
guidance of such great teachers that I am able to share this trans- 
lation work of an ancient sacred language with others. I feel that 
all the immense amount of energy, time and effort put into this 
important work will not be in vain, if this translated ancient 
grammatical text would surely and greatly benefit all serious 
students of Pali in providing strong grammatical insights and 
skills they earnestly wished for. It will even be like receiving the 
greatest reward and abundant blessings for me if all earnest stu- 


4 


Preface 


dents pursuing the study of Pali would one day become compe- 
tent and accomplished Pali scholars of great goodwill who 
would selflessly serve the common interests and well-being of 
many in the human society. 


Acknowledgement 
While this translation work is being carried out, some people 
have graciously rendered unstinted support and compassionate 
help in many ways. Among such gracious people are the most 
Venerable Si-shin Sayadaw Bhaddanta Aggananabhivamsa 
(Mahavisuddharama Monastery, Mandalay), Shwe-tu-wan Saya 
daw U Saddhiyabhivarhsa (Yangon), Sayadaw U Neyadhamma 
bhivamsa & U Vicittabhivamsa of Masoe Yein Monastery 
(Mandalay), Sayadaw U Rajinda (Satipatthana Meditation Cen- 
ter) & Ms. Yap Siew Choo (Singapore) who ran errands and did 
all the necessary things tirelessly, Phrakru Vara Paññā Khun 
(Wat Maha That, Bangkok), Phra Nanakusala, Jamroon Damata 
(Maha Chulalongkorn Rajavidyalaya University, Bangkok, 
Thailand), Rob Moult who helped in reformatting of the book 
with great dedication, Dr. Wong & Flora Wong, Sister L.C., Ms. 
Elaine Lew Mee Ling, Yennifer Low, (all from Kuala Lumpur, 
Malaysia), Mrs. Genny Chee Family, Brother Li Chum family 
(Singapore), David Berry (Dharma Centre of Canada), Donald 
Altman (Moonlake media & Mindful Practices USA), Ms.Yin 
Yin Aye (Corona Hills, USA) Brihas Sarathy & U Tin Htoon 
(Pariyatti, USA), Nyan Lin Aung (La Puente, USA), Ms. Khin 
Mar Kyi & Ms. Khin Myo Kyi, Ms. Myint Myint Than & Hnin 
Hnin Aye (All from Mandalay), M. Thet Naing Kyaw (General 
formatting), K. Kyaw Han, Nalin Ariyarathne (Cover design), 
Ms. Moe Moe & Ms. Soe Moe Lwin (Final proof-reading), K. 
Kyaw Lwin of Dhamma download, all well-wishers not men- 
tioned by name but who generously contributed to this project. 
To all of them, I feel greatly indebted. Their generous help and 
goodwill are forever appreciated. May their goodwill and gener- 
osity enrich them in material abundance and spiritual wisdom to 


5 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


lead a blessed and fulfilled life. May their devotion to the triple 
gem bring them countless blessings. 


Patthanu’yyojana 
Englisaya bhasaya, Anuvuttam Kaccayanam. 
Sadhavo viciya sukham, Sikkhe Palivyakaranam. 


Ya'miha sutthu ni’ddittham, anvr'ritati' ca sabbaso 
Sü'padhariya sabbam tam, Paliniruttisa' fi hitam 


Pafifiaya somanassena, saddhapubbena chandasa 
Vyakaranamhi kusala, Buddhavacanamamaka 


Saddhammagaruka hontu, saddhammavuddhikarino 
Saparahitakari ca, amatayayino bhave. 


With boundless Metta and goodwill for all, 
A. Thitzana 


February 21, 2016 
USA 


Preface 


Preface to the Second Edition 


It is not an overstatement to say that ancient India is not only the 
cradle of the Indian civilization, but also of four major religious 
beliefs; Hinduism, Jainism, Buddhism and Sikhism. The pro- 
found wisdom, extraordinary talent and uniquely diverse and 
rich ideas of ancient Indian sages and scholars of various 
branches of knowledge have enriched the life, the language, the 
custom and traditions of people in myriad ways in India as well 
as in other lands of the East and Southeast Asia. Pali is one of 
the ancient Indian languages used and spoken by Buddha in im- 
parting his profound wisdom and daily teachings throughout his 
entire life. Buddha had taught his teachings on the basis of intel- 
lectual analysis and wisdom, not on the basis of either dogma or 
rituals. Knowing Pali with substantial amount of mastery is the 
sure way to appreciate his teachings in its entirety. 


The learners of an ancient language such as Pali or Sanskrit need 
a more simple and easy guide in their first stage of learning, a 
guide book free of any hard-to-understand technical terms and 
academic aspects of non-essential details. Every effort had been 
made to ensure that the English translation of Kaccayana Pali 
grammar is free of any complexity for both beginners and schol- 
ars alike. Since its publication in 2016, the first edition of Eng- 
lish translation of Kaccayana Pali grammar had provided a con- 
venient platform for the study of Pali, paving the way for a more 
progressive and systematic Pali and Buddhist text studies. 


This second edition of the Kaccayana Pali Grammar is thor- 
oughly revised and edited to make sure that any typographic or 
inadvertent errors which might have escaped the scrutiny and 
careful proof-reading in the first edition are either rectified or 
improved. Some additional footnotes along with a few more rel- 
evant explanations are added wherever needed. In addition, a 
new note under the heading of "Gender Classification" is further 


7 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


added in the appendices section in order to provide the students 
with an important basic guide regarding the gender of Pali 
words. The main body of first edition, however, mostly re- 
mained intact. 


I fervently hope that this revised new edition will provide all the 
students of Pali and Indology with a simple and convenient 
guide in their endeavor to go deeper into the language and fur- 
ther develop necessary grammatical knowledge and language 
skills. 


Acknowledgement 

I would like to acknowledge my utmost sincere thanks to Anto- 
nio Costanzo who have made the most part of reviewing pro- 
cess. He reviewed both volumes of the text with great commit- 
ment and dedicated effort by going through every detail of the 
two volumes of Kaccayana grammar text. Antonio had put a lot 
of time and energy into reviewing of the books with much pa- 
tience and perseverance for which I felt eternally indebted be- 
yond words and humbly inspired by such selfless help. My pro- 
found thanks are also due to Motilal Banarsidass Publishers for 
the vision and foresight to continuously enrich and enhance the 
wonderful heritage of ancient Indian civilization by having the 
English translation copy of this ancient Indian grammar text 
printed at their press and thus providing an opportunity to be 
shared with others in the world. 


Patthana 
Kaccayani’ dam byakaranam, dutiyam’pi sumudditam 
Motilal banarsidass-bharatiyamuddalaye. 
Englisa'nuvacitam, vyakkhatarh suvibhavitar 
suvisodhiya nissesam, sampunnam suviracitam 
saddalakkhanabodheyam, suvibhattarh sujaniyam 
sukhena prijanantu, samugganhantu sadhavo. 


Preface 


[Translation] This Kaccayana Grammar text which have been 
translated into English, is published for the second time, at the 
Motilal Banarsidassa Press, India, after having thoroughly edited 
and improved. May the students of goodwill easily understand 
and study well this exegetical work which had been well- 
explained and easy to learn on the grammatical aspects. 


पत्थना 
कच्चायनिदं ब्याकरणं। दुतियम्पि सुमुदिदतं। 
मोतिलाल बानारसीदास-मारतियमुदूदालये ॥ 
सुविसोधिय निस्सेसं । सम्पुणणं सुविरचितं i 
इङ्गलिसानुवचितं । ब्यक्खातं सुविभावितं ॥ 
सद्‌दलक्खणबोघेयं । सुविभत्तं सुजानियं i 
सुखेन परिजानन्तु । समुग्गण्हन्तु साघवो ॥ 


A. Thitzana 
21st October, 2018 
USA 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 
Introduction 


Historical Background 

The relationship of Sanskrit, Pali and Prakrit 
It is quite obvious that Pali, Sanskrit and Prakrit have indeed 
common linguistic traits and close parallels to each other. These 
ancient languages, which belong to the Indo-Aryan language 
family of the Indus civilization, are linked not only in terms of 
geographic, cultural and close societal conditions, but also 
through some shared grammatical elements and inherent linguis- 
tic patterns. The intimate contact through daily interaction 
among people might have played a greater part in the develop- 
ment of such shared linguistics which resulted in somewhat in- 
terfused grammatical system. It can be logically assumed that 
the grammar of each respective language might have had ap- 
peared alongside since many centuries prior to or around the 
time of Buddha. None of them, however, were put into any rec- 
ord in the form of the written manuscripts but were rather passed 
through generations as orally transmitted grammatical trends. 
This might be the reason why the great grammarian Panini had 
made references in some of his Suttas to his predecessor gram- 
marians. Amazingly enough, with the emergence of various be- 
lief-systems in the ancient Indian society, each language has 
come to play as the sacred languages of three main religious 
ideas among which Sanskrit became the sacred language of 
Hinduism and Vedic texts, while Pali being the sacred media for 
all Buddhist texts and Prakrit being the sacred language of Jains 
and their religious texts. 


Pali Grammar vs. Sanskrit Grammar 
The grammar or the science of language, had occupied high and 
honorable place in the ancient civilization of India. Having 
much grammatical skill and expertise is one of the virtues of be- 
ing a respectable man of dignity among high social elites. The 


10 


Introduction 


pursuit of grammatical study was thus a very respected trend of 
learning those days. 


Though there have been ancient grammars previously, the only 
extant and oldest Sanskrit grammar still in use is the one written 
by Panini which is referred to as "ashtadhyay1". As the name 
suggests, it has eight chapters, with numerous Suttas (aphorisms 
or brief grammatical rules) totaling 3995 in all. Both Sanskrit 
and Pali grammars have similar grammatical models as all have 
the same format of having eight chapters although the contents 
of each are distinctive and different in their own various aspects. 
The Pali Grammar, the one traditionally believed to have been 
written by the great Pali grammarian Kaccayana is not totally 
based on the Paninian-system but an independent work which 
has its own style and character. Thus, there is significant differ- 
ence and an independent way of presentation of the grammar. 


The Grammarians of Ancient India 

In ancient Indian society, the tradition of learning any branch of 
knowledge including the grammar, is usually based on the oral 
tradition transmitted by teacher to student for many generations 
until modern printing machine was introduced into India at the 
turn of fifteenth century by the Christian missionaries. The study 
of grammar, even before Buddha's time, is pursued by social 
elites especially those belonging to the high Brahmin caste. The 
Sanskrit, Pali and Prakrit are the languages interwoven and in- 
tertwined into the ancient Indian society as linguistic threads in 
the matters of daily communication and learning among diverse 
communities. It is no wonder that the grammar of each lan- 
guage, as a result, have certain things in common despite having 
some distinctive features of their own in many respects. The fol- 
lowing verses mention the name of ancient grammarians: 


11 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


(1) इन्द्रश्चन्द्रः काशकृत्स्तापिशली शाकटायनः | 
पाणिन्यमरजैनेन्द्राः जयन्त्यष्टादिशान्दिकाः ॥ 

(2) इन्द्रं चान्द्रं काशकृत्स्नं कोमारं शाकटायनम 
सारस्ततं चापिशलं शाकल्यं पाणिनीयकम ॥ 


According to these verses, there have been eight earlier gram- 
marians (adisabdika) such as Indra, Candra, Kasakrtsna, Apisali, 
Sakatayana, Panini, Amara and Jainendra. In the second verse, 
Komara (usually referred to as Katantra or Kalapa Vyakarana), 
Sarasvata and Sakalya are extra names cited as grammarians. 
All those Indian grammarians are a mixed breed of scholars 
from different religious backgrounds. Among them, Candra 
(Circa 400-480 A.D), Jainendra (Circa 8th century A.D), for ex- 
ample, are the disciples of Buddha. There was a verse of saluta- 
tion to Buddha by the author Candra Gomin at the beginning of 
his grammar text which reads: 


सिद्धं प्रणम्य सर्वेज्ञं । सवीयं जगतो TOT | 
लघु विश्वस्तसम्पुर्ण । मुच्यते शब्दलक्ष्णम ॥ 


Those grammarians had lived in different timelines though some 
of them might have been quite possibly co-eval. However, it is 
beyond the capacity of anyone to deconstruct or reconstruct the 
past incidences which happened many centuries ago. As such, it 
is quite problematic to establish the exact order of timeline of 
these ancient grammarians and establish the correct biographic 
profile and the earliest seniority of one over another. 


Of those grammarians, Panini is the most eminent as his gram- 
mar is still extant and occupies the highest place of honor and 
respect among the grammarians of ancient India. In both aspects 
of linguistics and grammar, Panini's grammar is indisputably an 
outstanding treatise as it details the areas of word-formation, 


12 


Introduction 


morphology, philology, sound system and various grammatical 
rules. Despite unique attributes of linguistic ingenuity, Panini 
had undoubtedly adapted or incorporated the grammatical con- 
cepts of his predecessors in one way or the other. This fact 15 
clearly noticeable through references he used to make in some 
Suttas of his grammar text to his predecessor grammarians such 
as Kasakrtsna, Apisali and Sakatayana. 


Panini's "ashtadhyayi" grammar served as a seminal ground in 
which attempts either to gloss over his text or to reformat or to 
improve on his grammar are pursued by later grammarians. 


This had led to the development of rich grammatical literature of 
ancient India. Among such notable grammatical treatises written 
within the premises of Paninian concepts are: (A) a monumental 
commentary work titled "Maha Bashya" by Patanjali, (B) a more 
improved thematic treatment of Panini titled "Vaiyakarana Sid- 
dhanta Kaumudi" by Bhattoji Dikseta and (C) Kasika Vritti (still 
an extensive commentarial work on Panini). 


Also, another grammarian named Varadaraja, who is the disci- 
ple of Bhattoji Dikseta, wrote three grammar texts. They are: 
(1) Madhyakaumudi, (2) Laghukaumudi, (3) Sarakaumudi, (an 
abridged, but well-presented version of Laghukaumudi). His 
grammars are arranged in a manner which is more thematic and 
easy to study, yet simple to understand even for the beginners. 


Kaccayana 
Kaccayana, like Panini, is a pioneer, the earliest-known Pali 
grammarian whose work too either adapted or absorbed some 
terminology and fundamental grammatical concepts from the 
preceding grammatical sources he is well-conversant with. Even 
though his work cannot be said as a grammar solely based on 
the Paninian system and model, there are quite a number of Sut- 
tas whose physical structures or functions share some similari- 


13 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


ties with those found in Panini's "ashtadhyayi" grammar. This 
does not mean that all those supposedly similar Suttas are totally 
identical in terms of both structure and function. Upon closer 
observation and careful analysis, some of the Suttas are found 
only to have structural resemblances to some degree but quite 
different in terms of functions. Some Suttas, as a matter of ob- 
jective analysis, are found to have similar functions although the 
ratio of such Suttas are quite marginal in relation to voluminous 
numbers of Suttas contained in Ashtadhyayt. 


Kaccayana and his identity 
The term Kaccayana (कच्चायन or कात्यायन Katyayana?, a 


somewhat differently spelt name due mainly to different mor- 
phological procedures which exists in Pali & Sanskrit gram- 
mars) is a name of highly regarded disciple of Buddha. Accord- 
ing to the descriptions in Buddhist texts, he was born in Ujjeni, 
into an educated wealthy Brahmin family, whose father is royal 
advisor (Purohita) to the king. He is highly educated in all an- 
cient Vedic and Upanishad texts and also highly skilled in the 
grammar. He later became a disciple of Buddha and well-known 
for his wonderful capacity to explain any brief sayings of Bud- 
dha in a way either to be in tune with or completely agrees with 
Buddha's original view. Therefore, Lord Buddha praised him 
and placed him in a special position of honor known as 
Eta'dagga (The most outstanding position) among disciples in a 


? See page vii, the preface to Prakrita Prakasa (1868 Edition) by Professor 
E.B. Cowel, The University of Cambridge. Also the same spelling of this 
name (कात्यायन) is seen in the initial verse of Kita section of the Katanta 
Vritti written by Durga simha (दुर्ग सिंह) which reads: 

वृच्तादिवदमी wer | कृतिना न PT: कृतः | 

कात्यायनेन ते सृष्टा । विबुद्धिप्रतिवृद्धथे ॥ 


14 


Introduction 


particular field of excellence in being able to correctly elucidate 
Buddha's short sayings into detail. 


In Apadana'tthakatha, II (the commentary to Apadana texts 
which is like the biographic accounts about special deeds in the 
past lives of eminent disciples of Buddha), there is some re- 
markable account regarding Venerable Maha Kaccayana which 
reads: 


Attano pubbapatthanavasena Kaccayanapakaranam, 
Mahaniruttipakaranam, Nettipakaranan 'ti pakaranattayam 
samghamajjhe vyakasi. 


Atha santutthena bhagavatà "etada'ggam bhikkhave mama 
savakanam samkhittena bhasitassa vittharena attham 
vibhajantanam ya'didam Mahakaccano"ti etada’ggathane thapi- 
to aggaphalasukhena vihàsi. (Mahakaccayana'tthera 
apadanavannana, 54 Kaccayana vagga, pp 213, Chattha sanga 
yana Edition) 


[Translation] By virtue of his own aspirations in times of previ- 
ous Buddhas, he (i.e. Kaccayana) was able to outline and declare 
three monologues (texts) at an assembly of Samgha, namely, 
Kaccayana text, Maha Nirutti and Netti texts. 


Being satisfied on his intellectual prowess, Lord Buddha then 
honored him with the "etadagga" honor, a highest, outstanding- 
ly exalted position by making the following statement: 


"Of all my disciples who can explain whatever I have said 
briefly, Kaccayana is the most outstanding of all". 


Having placed in such an exalted position, Venerable Maha 
Kaccayana, mostly lived a quiet and unfettered life enjoying the 
noble peaceful fruit (i.e. the benefit) of his enlightenment. 


15 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


Also, there are some discourses such as Madhupindika Sutta, 
Madhura Sutta and Mahakaccana Badde’karatta Sutta in the 
Majjhima Nikaya and Uparipannasa texts where Venerable 
Maha Kaccayana's detailed explanations won Buddha's unre- 
served praise. 


In the light of such accounts from Buddhist texts, the author of 
earliest Pali grammar can still possibly be assumed as a well- 
known personality from the viewpoint of scriptural records de- 
spite some later academic opinions of different views. However, 
the two grammatical texts, (Kaccayana text & Maha Nirutti) 
which he was supposed to have authored, may have actually ex- 
isted in the form of grammatical principles and relevant 
knowledge handed down and preserved through successive gen- 
erations of monastics by means of the oral tradition only. 


In one ancient Pali record named Sutta-niddesa, the legend has 
it that the first Sutta of Kaccayana's grammar "Attho Akkha- 
rasafifiato" which had served as the most important initial 
statement regarding the principle of grammatical necessity of a 
language, is attributed to Lord Buddha Himself. Those words 
which form as the first Sutta were supposed to have been said by 
Buddha as the brief outline of advice and reminder to two medi- 
tating monks who were meditating by the river bank, but whose 
minds were being distracted and wrongly uttering the words 
"Udakabaka-water and egret" instead of the right word "Uday- 
abbaya-the arising and passing". Those initial words of Buddha, 
according to Sutta-niddesa, were further elaborated by venerable 
Kaccayana. Thus, that elaboration and exposition process has 
led to the development of such a detailed grammatical work 
which commonly referred to as "Kaccayana Vyakarana". 


Netti and Petakopadesa 
Although the Maha Nirutti text is no longer extant, The Netti 
(Annotative Exegesis) which is attributed to Kaccayana's au- 


16 


Introduction 


thorship is still extant. Besides these texts, The Petakopadesa 
(the conspectus summary of the canonical principles) is likewise 
attributed to his bright authorship evidently traceable through 
Pali records contained in both gantharambha (the beginning 
section) and Nigama (the concluding verses) at the end of both 
texts with his name specifically cited as shown below: 


(a) Solasahara netti, paficanayà sasanassa pariyetthi 
attharasamülapada, Mahakaccanena niddittha 
(The Beginning verse. 3 of Netti Pali text) 

(b) Ettavatà samatta netti ya ayasmata Mahakaccayanena 
bhasita bhagavatà anumodita mülasangitiyam sangita पी 
(The concluding words, the Netti Pali text) 

(a) Attharasamülapada Mahdakaccayana-gotta-niddittha 
(Uddana Gatha, Petakopadesa Pali Text) 

(b) Petakopadese Mahakaccayanena bhasite pathabhümi 
ariyasaccapakasanà nama 

(c) Therassa Mahakaccayanassa jambuvanavasino 
petakopadeso samatto (At the end of each section called "Bhümi" and 
also at the conclusion of Petakopadesa Pali Texts) 


The Netti and Petakopadesa Pali texts are replete with the most 
brilliant analytical exegesis and encyclopedic wisdom of the au- 
thor. The texts themselves serve as the clear testament to the 
linguistic ingenuity and extraordinary broad level of wisdom of 
Kaccayana. The grammar which he was supposed to have been 
elaborated is also unique in many ways. It bespeaks itself about 
the simplicity of Pali grammatical system without any hint of 
delicate technical complexities. It was in fact concisely written 
to explain the basic grammatical concepts, the relevant terms 
and simple morphological procedures. 

Due to incomplete fragments of the records and lack of exactly 
coherent chronological stratification in such a remote time, it is 
nevertheless impossible to draw an exclusive conclusion on the 
true identity of the author. The fact that the author may be a re- 


17 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


puted personality such as the one found in the scriptural records 
or just an obscure person of the same name who might have 
been much earlier or coeval with the author of Katantra gram- 
mar or a much later one is an unsettled issue. It is still open for 
unbiased scholarly opinion and intellectual analysis. It is none- 
theless beyond the capacity of anyone to exactly point out in a 
more conclusive manner by reconstructing incoherent and unre- 
liable fragments of the past records and events which happened 
in such a long span of time except on vague terms of intellectual 
speculation and inferential hypothesis. 


It is almost logically as well as historically tenable to hold a fac- 
tual view not based on inveterate bias. Among such views, is a 
possibility that there must have already been a Pali grammar of 
some sort which might have existed not in the form of a com- 
plete text but in an oral tradition over such a long period of 1800 
years’ time spanning from the birth of Lord Buddha in B.C. 624 
to the close of 1200 A.D, a timeline when Buddhism had flour- 
ished in the Indian sub-continent. 


According to the "Indica" written in Arabic by Persian scholar 
Al-Bīrūnī (Circa 973-1048) and translated by Edward Sachau, 
some mention is made regarding the popular grammars used 
then among Buddhist communities. They were the one written 
by Candra Gomin and another non-Paninian grammar named 
Katantra written by Sarvavarman, both of which were known to 
have been widely used among Buddhist communities. Candra 
Gomin authored Candra Vyakarana, a Sanskrit grammar some- 
what similar to the Paninian system but a distinctive grammati- 
cal work which has about 3099 Suttas. The author himself was a 
disciple of Buddha which he had indicated by the beginning 
verse of the text. 


18 


Introduction 


Katantra and Kaccayana 

Some Western scholars, such as ?Arthur A. Macdonell had 
opined that Kaccayana's work must have been based mainly on 
the grammatical model of Katantra vyakarana also known as 
Kalapa or Komara (authored by Sarvavarman) as the striking 
similarities, especially similar naming of the chapters, the names 
of Akhyata verbs and some similar Suttas are found in the 
Kaccayana's work. To put such similarity in a clear perspective, 
it could be simply and obviously a matter of shared funda- 
mentals of the Sanskrit and Pali. Both languages have had in- 
herent affinity to each other since the early days of their incep- 
tion as the spoken languages as far as the Indian civilization is 
concerned. This nature of affiliation along with interfusion of 
the grammatical thoughts of successive generation of grammari- 
ans had resulted in such apparent grammatical similitude to a 
certain degree. 


Supposedly, Katantra could had been a widely used grammatical 
text among Buddhist communities in India and Tibet for many 
years. Most scholars such as Sri Patidatta (श्री पतिदत्त), Tri- 
locanadasa (त्रिलोचनदास, the author of Kalapa Pifijika) and Dur- 
gasimha (दुर्गसिंह, the author of Katantra Vritti Tika), an im- 
portant commentary on the Katantra grammar, were assumed to 
be Buddhist disciples in the light of the following verse written 
by Durgasimha at the beginning of his text "Katantra Vritti". 
The verse clearly attest to it. Here is the verse: 


देवदेवं प्रणम्यादौ । सर्वज्ञं सर्वदशिनम । 
कातन्त्रस्य प्रवक्ष्यामि । व्याख्यनं शार्वेवमिकम ॥ 


If seen from the viewpoint of a broader intellectual position and 
unbiased objectivity, the nature of some fundamental similarity 


? See the introduction, A Sanskrit Grammar for students by Arthur A. Mac- 
donell. 


19 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


found in Panini, Kaccayana and Katantra can also be viewed as 
a kind of relative symbiosis, not as complete similarity. Most 
similar Suttas, with the exception of a few identical ones found 
in the Panini, Katantra and Kaccayana, are not totally identical 
with regard to the functions they enjoined or the meanings im- 
plied by those supposedly similar Suttas. This fact is very clear- 
ly noticeable and self-evident when one carefully delves into 
Kaccayana's grammar and make a comparative juxtaposition and 
objective analysis. The list of such seemingly similar Suttas, 
albeit being different in terms of contents and enjoined func- 
tions, are shown separately in the appendices section of this 
book in order of Suttas as found in the "ashtadhyayi" of Panini 
and Katantra grammars. 


The Talent and Skill 
Regardless of various views with respect to the exact authorship, 
the Kaccayana's Pali Grammar text is a living testament to the 
linguistic talent, the grammatical skills and intellectual caliber of 
the author. He had deftly charted his own grammatical path by 
defining a more clearly distinctive presentation of the grammar 
uniquely independent of ubiquitous Paninian influences. 


There is no doubt regarding the fact that he is an accomplished 
as well as a competently talented grammarian who has had un- 
questionable mastery in both Sanskrit and Pali languages and in 
relevant matters of the grammar. His grammatical work simply 
stands out of the shadow of predecessors and shines in his own 
intellectual light and in a class by itself. His linguistic acumen, 
the highest level of caliber and ingenuity as a skillful grammar- 
ian are clearly noticeable. Had Kaccayana followed all which he 
had known in the Sanskrit grammarian models, even the initial 
preliminary section (संझाप्रकरणम) alone would have become a 
sort of repetition. He had skillfully drawn the clear and fine line 
of a very important Pali-grammatical core principle which he 


20 


Introduction 


has formally termed as "Jinavacanayutta (the principle of con- 
formity to the relevant usage in Buddhist Pali texts)." 


He had formulated this important principle in Sutta number 52 
so as to steer clear of the procedures and linguistic nuances 
which used to be generally applied in the Sanskrit grammars. He 
had dexterously distinguished the natural physiology of Pali 
words and its grammar by formulating new relevant rules, num- 
bers, tense and moods, verb and noun terminations and simple 
morphological procedures. These facts are distinctive from the 
Sanskrit although he had adapted or integrated some aspects of 
the Sanskrit grammatical models. He had thus masterfully laid 
out a very simple, yet markedly different grammatical model 
quite uniquely exceptional in its own way though not totally dis- 
similar from that of the fraternal Sanskrit models. 


These facts are self-manifest by the grammatical text itself. He 
clearly sees a very fine and delicate line which inherently exists 
between what is Sanskritized and what is not. This becomes 
even more noticeable when one goes into all the length, width, 
and depth of his grammatical text. One will, in the course of 
studying his text, clearly understand how difficult and delicate it 
will be for a grammarian to draw a very subtle demarcation be- 
tween the two languages which have shared, though not totally 
identical, grammatical frameworks and linguistic norms. Unless 
he is a very consummate grammarian, it will certainly be impos- 
sible to formulate the rules and procedures applicable and rele- 
vant to the natural linguistic patterns of the Pali. Instead, it will 
be a rebranding of the same packet with the same contents. 


The Distinctive Pali Grammars 
There are a number of Pali grammars which were written by em- 
inent scholars. Among such treatises, the Moggalana Pali 
grammar written by the great scholar monk named Moggalana 
of Sri Lanka (Circa 11-12 A.D), is a distinctively unique Pali 


21 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


grammar. With 1037 Suttas thematically arranged in seven dif- 
ferently named chapters, he had authored one of the most bril- 
liant Pali grammatical texts, unique in its own style. His text was 
supposed to have been mainly based on the Candra Vyakarana‘* 
of Candra Gomin. It was in fact a different grammatical work 
independent of Kaccayana but seemed a bit Sanskritized in the 
physical structure of some Suttas and distinctive terminology of 
some functions, affixes and usage of anuvandha (conjoined tech- 
terms). The great grammarian Kaccayana can rightly be said as a 
pioneering grammarian whose seminal work had served as a 
foundation from which various grammatical treatises of the Pali 
language had later emerged. Among such ones is the Saddaniti 
written by the great Pali scholar named Aggavamsa of Burma in 
the ancient city of Bagan (Circa 1157 A.D). The author of Sad- 
daniti, could be coeval with Moggalana. Saddaniti is indeed a 
very extensive grammatical treatise which is almost encyclope- 
dic in terms of topic and contents written within the premises of 
Kaccayana. 


Another grammar is Rüpasiddhi Vyakarana (also known as Pa- 
da rüpasiddhi). It is a very unique grammatical text written by 
the great Pali scholar monk named Buddhappiya of Sri Lanka 
(Circa 13 A.D). There are 672 Suttas with the exception of three 
Suttas viz. Samase ca vibhasa, Arahasakkadthi tum, Sacajanam 


^ Though the old original manuscript of Candra Vyakarana did not not sur- 
vive to date, the one still accessible for modern day researchers is a copy of 
the grammatical text named "Candra Vyakarana of Candra Gomin" edited by 
Kshitish Chandra Chatterji, Sastri M.A., D.Lit. There are 3099 Suttas in it. 
The arrangement of Suttas and portioning of the chapters are non-thematic in 
Candra grammar while in Moggalana it is more thematic, more methodical 
and well-assigned. After careful research, it is found that there are only about 
330 Suttas in the Moggalana's text which have similarities to varying degrees. 
In the light of this, the degree of similarity between the two grammatical texts 
is quite marginal. 


22 


Introduction 


kaga nanubandhe, found in Kaccayana. It is a very extensive, 
broad treatment of the Kaccayana's work with a more systematic 
explanation of thematically arranged Suttas, a unique aspect of 
his grammatical text which proves the talent and wisdom of a 
true scholarly capacity of the author. A wider variety of relevant 
examples in each Suttas drawn from the scriptures as well as 
from various sources also added up to its uniqueness. His text, 
although he had said as being based on Kaccayana's work, is in 
fact an outstanding work of the applied grammar written within 
the confines of Kaccayana's grammar and had as such received 
much popularity. The style and presentation of grammatical les- 
sons such as proceeding from the previous Sutta to the next Sut- 
ta, explaining the meaning of Sutta and elucidating the word 
structure and the relevant morphology of an example in a very 
pithy way, are innovative and informative which is not found in 
other Pali grammar texts. Thus, it is much easier to understand 
and accessible for both teachers and the students alike. 


Following the style of Rüpasiddhi, is a concise grammar superb- 
ly written by Dhammakitti of Sri Lanka (Circa 1390-1410 A.D) 
which is called Balavatara. The term Balavatara means "the 
beginner's easy access". [bala-the young person, i.e. uninitiated 
beginner-*ava-down, being inside+tara-to swim, i.e. to access]. 
It is an abridged grammar arranged in a very systematic order of 
relevant chapters with about 420 Suttas, making it much more 
compact and concise in the structural design of grammatical 
text. The text has remarkable brevity and simplicity in imparting 
necessary grammatical knowledge and presentation of it in a 
more effectively brief style. Despite its small size, 1t covers all 
the essential aspects of grammar for beginners thus making it 
quite suitable for the beginners. 


In addition, there is another grammar which deserves respectful 
mentioning. It is Nirutti Dipant written by the eminent scholar 
monk Nanadhaja Mahathera, popularly known as the great 1,601 


23 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


Sayadaw of Burma (1846-1923 A.D). His text is based on the 
Moggalana's grammar as mentioned in the beginning verses of 
the text. In fact, it can even be said as an improvement on Mog- 
galana's grammatical text as there are some complex points in 
some Suttas of the original text. It is an outstanding grammatical 
masterpiece written in a very simple and understandable man- 
ner. 


As a matter of fact, there are considerable numbers of grammat- 
ical treatises written by the successive generations of Pali schol- 
ars of Sri Lanka and Burma from 11 century A.D to the close of 
19 century A.D. periods. Most of them can be classified into two 
Pali grammatical schools as either of Kaccayana or Moggalana. 
However, not all of those written treatises are focused on gram- 
matical aspects. A few ones, such as Sadda’tthabhedacinta and 
Kaccayanasara etc., mostly dealt with some of the delicate 
points of the grammar and grammatical polemics. One can only 
be amazed and inspired by the development of such a rich Pali 
grammatical literature in the history of Buddhism. 


The Study of Pali 
Advantage and Disadvantages 

Learning an ancient language such as Pali has more advantages 
than disadvantages. The reasons are quite obvious. Firstly, it is 
no longer a daily spoken language. Therefore, it has not expand- 
ed over a long period of time spanning two and half millennium. 
No new words nor any circumstantially emerged new terms are 
added through the passage of such a long time of Buddhism in 
its daily contact with the changing social, cultural and language 
patterns of everyday world. This does not mean that Pali is a 
completely dead language which remains static. It can neverthe- 
less be active and progressive like its cousin language Sanskrit 
when it is being revived and renewed by means of the relevant 
coinage of appropriate words and more added loan-words by the 
forward-looking academics. 


24 


Introduction 


Secondly, Pali, especially the canonical Pali in the Buddhist 
scriptures, has a more fixed pattern of the style and usage in its 
coherent structure and modes of expression. Anyone with seri- 
ous interest and determination, supported by the reliable source 
of guidance, such as a good book or a good teacher along with 
an effective learning method can progress quite smoothly and 
successfully within a short span of two to three years. There is 
no appreciable disadvantage in the learning process of Pali for 
anyone. These two facts, that it is no longer a living language 
with an ever-expanding vocabulary and having fixed patterns of 
the structure, are wonderful advantages for a keen and serious 
student in his learning journey. 


Why the Romanized Pali? 

When translating the grammar text, a common linguistic plat- 
form of the Romanized Pali is deliberately chosen, instead of the 
traditional oriental scripts such as either Devanagari or Burmese 
scripts. The choice of the Romanized Pali is genuinely for the 
sake of reaching out to a wider base of the international stu- 
dents, not out of disregard for the tradition, nor based on any 
biased views and language preferences. 


All of the grammatical text has been translated along with de- 
tailed explanations, footnotes and tables added wherever neces- 
sary. Some grammatical points, which may seem quite complex 
to students, are carefully explained and simplified by means of a 
more simple yet easy to understand clarification and elucidation 
process. Detailed care is given to interpret and elucidate the es- 
sential meanings of each Sutta so that the students will easily 
understand the function and the rules each Sutta implies in addi- 
tion to clearly highlighting the applied function on the examples. 
Sometimes one may come across some of the redundant phrases 
and easily understandable sentences in its original text. Such 
instances of repeated texts are left as it 1s, in order to avoid ple- 
onastic renderings. Of any translation work on the Kaccayana's 


25 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


grammar, it is humbly hoped that this is by far a thorough and 
complete work as all the original text of each Sutta, along with 
its main examples, the split-Sutta functions, some additional ex- 
positions regarding the component words of the Sutta and relat- 
ed examples thereof, are translated and explained in a more sim- 
ple and understandable manner. 


Dialectics and Simple Exegesis 

The students will even find that studying and reading such an 
ancient grammatical text, which may be seemingly boring and 
monotonous, becomes quite lively and enlightening when they 
go through the question and answer sessions which used to 
begin with "Kima'ttham? (For what purpose is this word, this 
function or this procedure?) and Kva’ttho? (What benefit is 
there?) etc. It is clear that the ancient grammarians did not lack 
common sense, tact or talent in imparting the grammatical 
knowledge to the students. They clearly knew what they needed 
to do in the process of teaching a language to enliven the interest 
of the students and keep them engaged in the learning process 
by means of including such a system of dialectics. Therefore, 
simple explanatory answers are given to each question in a de- 
tailed, understandable manner as it was traditionally taught by 
teachers. Thus, it becomes more clearer and understandable by 
practically pointing out the relevant examples shown in the Sut- 
ta. As a matter of fact, translating such an ancient text complete 
with complex linguistic concepts and some subtle grammatical 
technicalities through the medium of another language, is not an 
easy task. Needless to say, it surely requires resourcefulness, a 
lot of hard work, strong determination and an extensive research 
and references along with the relevant information from various 
sources. During the entire period of translating and preparing 
this book, various grammatical texts and other related literature 
written in Pali, Sanskrit as well as in Hindi were extensively re- 
searched. 


26 


Introduction 


It is a daunting project fraught with challenges and pitfalls. Eve- 
ry effort has been made to avoid any inadvertent error or misrep- 
resentations throughout the translation process although it can 
not be said as a perfect work. It is nonetheless humbly assumed 
as a thorough work which has been done in a more detailed 
manner as far as possible and to the extent of pertinent necessi- 
ty. Any phrase or word of the grammatical significance is never 
left untranslated nor remain unexplained throughout. 


Traditional Pali Script Vs. Romanized Pali 

Traditional Pali written in Devanagari or any Asian alphabet 
system poses some evident challenges for a beginner as there is 
no clear and visible separation of the vowel and consonant in its 
writing style. It is generally written by means of diacritical 
marks, add-on ligature and sometimes a dot. A dot represents 
"niggahita" in the Pali grammar which is also called "anusvara" 
in the Sanskrit grammars. The grammars of ancient Indo-Aryan 
languages such as Sanskrit and Pali, teach about a detailed sys- 
tem of metamorphosis of the words which occur among vowels 
and consonants. A student of such grammars needs to have the 
basic knowledge on the rudiments of such languages, a process 
which takes some considerable amount of time before the actual 
learning process can practically start. 
In order to easily understand this, the following basically differ- 
ing writing styles of the Devanagari Pali, Burmese Pali and Ro- 
manized Pali are shown alongside. [Please note that there is no 
representation of an "a" as it is traditionally assumed hidden in 
the basic form of every consonant without any mark. Read left 
to right. Left will be referred to as "the front" while the right 
will be referred to as "behind, after or the next" in explain- 
ing the morphological procedures and application of a Sutta's 
function in this book]. 


[Devanagari] का कि की कुकू के को कं 


27 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


[Diacritical marks which symbolizes vowels & dot] 


na rf री EE 


०0 Ox 
0 e o 
[Burmese] M MD OD OD OP R ००० ०००० ०० 


[Diacritical marks which symbolizes vowels & dot] 


0 o o 
na १ tow £ ७--0 


[Romanized PaliJKa Ka Ki Ki Ku Kā Ke Ko Kam 


In Devanagari and Burmese characters, "a", the first vowel, 1s 
totally invisible. à, i, 1, u, ü, e, o are shown by diacritical marks 
while "Ih or m" is shown by a dot on top or below the conso- 
nant "m". 


Besides, the way of writing conjunct-consonants is quite a chal- 
lenge for a beginner as it is written either horizontally or verti- 
cally. In Devanagari, it is written in either horizontal or vertical 
style using a truncated half-form of the syllable and add-on 
symbols. For example, 


(Horizontal) कक(kka) seme(kkha) ग्ग(829) Ta(ggha) 
च्च (cca) Sja) ^ ella) 

(Vertical) इ (hka) F (nga) z (tta) G(ddha) &(hna) and so on. 
In Burmese writing style, it is also either in horizontal or vertical 
style. For example, 
(Horizontal) 022 (Ka) eoo (Ke) ७6000 (Ko) 
(Vertical) 03(Ki), KT), OPK), RKT), o3(Kam), 

gg (kka), og(kkha), g(egha), g(a), [S (ndri), 


28 


Introduction 


In the Romanized Pali, the vowel after each consonant it accom- 
panies, is clearly visible in a non-conjunct single combination of 
one consonant and one vowel. In the writing style of conjuncts, 
it is quite clear and simple without any vowel between two or 
three cluster-formation of the consonants. There is no need to 
use any vertical style writing nor any diacritical mark. This 
makes it far more easier for the student to understand some 
minute details in the process of morphological changes being 
taken place in a word as per the function of a Sutta's rule. Such 
ease of understanding will further make it even more interesting 
to learn the grammatical evolution process of Pali words for the 
students. 


The Rules and Role of Grammar 

When one starts learning a new language, grammar is a first step 
to begin with. The rules of grammar are consistently estab- 
lished patterns of a language discovered by the grammarians 
of sharp linguistic insight. As such, they do neither invent nor 
stipulate these rules but expound those rules in such a way 
that it would make a coherently understandable text for the stu- 
dent. The majority of modern Pali learning guides written by the 
scholars, usually adopt a more brief, efficient, and abridged- 
form of the teaching method which may contain, if not all, nec- 
essary rules with the practical exercises. They may not cover all 
the minute nuances and some essential aspects which play more 
important roles in the development of grammatical insight and 
subsequent mastery of the language. They may not be able to 
offer more in-depth, detailed insight into the structural patterns 
of words in a way an original text of the Pali grammar can pos- 
sibly do. Take a look at the following sentences to clarify this. 


For example, 


29 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


(a) Namo Tassa Bhagavato Arahato Sammasambuddhassa. 
Salutation to that Lord Buddha, who has infinite glories, worthy of re- 
spect and perfectly enlightened. 

Namo (Re: Sutta 104) Tassa (Re: Sutta 61) Bhagavato (Re: Sutta 127) 
Arahato (Re: Sutta 187, 127) Sammasambuddhassa (Re: Sutta 61) 


(b) Buddham Saranam Gacchami . 
To the Buddha, I go (as) refuge. 


Buddhar (re: Sutta 297) Saranam (Re: Sutta 297) Gacchami (Re: Sutta 423, 
476, 478) 


(c) Ekam Samayam Bhagava Savatthiyam Viharati Jetavane. 
At one time, Lord Buddha stays at the city of Savatthi, in the prince Jeta's 
grove. 
Ekarh Samayam (Re: Sutta 307) Bhagava (Re: Sutta 124) 


Savatthiyam (Re: Sutta 216) Viharati (Re: Sutta 423) Jetavane (Re: Sutta 
108) 
Note: The underlined points indicate the grammatical aspects. The numbers 
indicate the relevant Suttas whose rules affect such word-forms & structures. 


Although one may roughly understand the meaning of each sen- 
tence, one may not yet thoroughly understand with respect to the 
structural patterns or the specific mode of inflection shown un- 
derlined as to why it is shaped like such and what it means etc. 
An ancient grammar such as this Pali grammar can give all the 
necessary instruction and insight into the fundamental aspects of 
the word structure and thereby leading to the development of 
strong grammatical skills firmly established in the students. It 
will take the student far beyond superficial level of the words to 
a more deeper understanding of how each word is built and 
evolved to play their individual roles and convey necessary 
meanings. To simply put, it will provide the students with a 
more in-depth understanding of the individual words so that they 
gain mastery of the Pali words in the long term. This will further 
help them firmly settle in the good stead of the Pali language. 


30 


Introduction 


The Style of Translation 

Translating an ancient academic text is quite different from 
translating a simple narrative. It has to be simple and to the point 
so that it is easily understandable. Therefore, a more informal 
non-literary style of translation is applied for the most part of 
this translation although some literal "word for word" transla- 
tions are added wherever necessary in order to elucidate some of 
the delicate and complex points. In addition, notes, some de- 
tailed explanations, tables and footnotes are added for the pur- 
pose of easy understanding and clarification wherever it is called 
for. For some Pali-terms with ambiguous meanings, an equiva- 
lent Sanskrit word is shown alongside. Every reasonable effort 
has been made to translate almost every part of the grammatical 
text without making any exception to its contents. 

The purpose is to make students aware that a standard ancient 
grammatical text is a very broad and a very rich presentation of 
the linguistics and grammar conceptualized by the most bright 
and talented sages of the ancient times. There is a very visible 
element of dynamics in the whole text where the evolution of a 
word, or words as part of a complete language, are brought to 
coherent completion by means of injunctive rules of each Sutta 
and due morphological procedures. This way, each different Pali 
word of various evolving patterns becomes ready to be used in a 
group of words known grammatically as a sentence. Moreover, a 
grammatical text also explains on genders, nouns, verbs, voices, 
persons and all the necessary rules regarding the applicable 
grammatical norms and standards though it may not be quite 
identical with today's contemporary grammars. 


The Grammatical Codes 
When translating the meaning of each individual word, whether 
it be an example word without context, or a word with different 
structural components such as the plain nouns, compound 
nouns, Taddhita-nouns, Kita-affixed nouns or Akhyata verbs 
along with their relevant case-endings, a standardized, yet 


31 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


easy-to-understand grammatical codes of abbreviations is 
devised and added wherever deemed necessary. Without the 
use of such improvised codes, it would be rather futile and im- 
possible to render a meaningful translation of such an ancient 
text. It is therefore advisable to refer to the list of abbrevia- 
tions section and necessary information prior to studying this 
book. 


Some Notes on the Romanized Pali Alphabets 

"m" Or "m" Or "y"? 

When representing some Pali words, especially "Niggahita, the 
so-called dot", it is used to be shown either as "i" or "m" or 
"p". In view of the grammatical norms regarding the "Niggahi- 
ta", "i" is more preferable as it is rather in line with its inher- 
ent nature of having a symbolic "upper dot" aptly positioned on 
top of the three short (rassa) vowels, such as "am, irh and um", 
not with its symbolic "dot" down below. In the earlier publica- 
tions of Pali-related books, rh or m are used to show it. Some- 
times, "p" is also found to be used by some scholars in the case- 
endings of words or wherever a niggahita is needed to be repre- 
sented. All three styles are correct in its own way as it represents 
nasalized nature of the Niggahita, but it tends to be a bit confus- 
ing for the uninitiated beginner. In order to have a more stand- 
ardized, uniform representation of the niggahita dot, only “th” is 
chosen throughout this book so that the students will find it 
much easier to understand. As a matter of fact, a niggahita-dot 
can remain unchanged when the word ending in it is either an 
independent word by itself in a sentence, or the word itself has 
an integral dot as part of its structure such as varhsa-race, 
samgha-community (sangha is also applicable writing in case 
of a vagganta-function), amisa-shoulder, portion etc. However, 
when it is used as non-independent word such as the one being 
conjoined in a Sandhi-combination, it will have to change into 
any of ñ, ñ, n, n or m depending on any specific vagga-group of 
the letter it precedes. 


32 


Introduction 


Another confusable word is "b" which is interchangeable with 
"v". Please keep in mind that both can be assumed as the same 
as they are morphologically interchangeable though they have 


different sources of the sound. ["b" is labial, offhaja while "v" is 
denti-labial, danto'tthaja] 


Similarly, 1 and ] can be assumed quite similar as well as inter- 
changeable although they have different origins of the sound as | 
is dental dantaja, while ] is palatal muddhaja (cerebral, also 
called retroflex). 


Other syllables of somewhat similar sounds, such as t and t, tha 
and tha, d and d, dha and dha, n and n are also morphological- 
ly interchangeable although they have different origins of the 
sound. 


The Steps of Effective Learning 

The study of Pali language is to be pursued systematically so 
that the student will progress smoothly and successfully. The 
first step is called "Padasikkha-learning about the physiology 
of the words". The next second step is called "Vakyasikkha-the 
study of sentences". These two important steps, when methodi- 
cally followed, will surely set the student in a firm foundation of 
the grammar, leading him to develop the skills and ability to use 
the correct words in the right place in actual sentence writing 
and understanding of it. 


The first step of Padasikkha, studying the physiology of words 
involves learning the Suttas, its meaning and the enjoined func- 
tion and example words as explained in the relevant Suttas, 
along with studying their structural evolution through applicable 
morphological procedures. 


33 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


When this is sufficiently done, the noun groups which have 
similar make-ups through similar morphological procedures, 
classified in the same gender and declension, are to be familiar- 
ized both orally and grammatically. This process is called 
"Nama padamala (the garland of Nouns festooned together) " 
study. Then, the Verb groups which share similar kind of affix, 
conjugation and the same shared morphological procedures are 
to be studied likewise. This is called "Akhyata padamala" 
study. Having thoroughly and proficiently trained in these steps, 
it will lead the student to a firm grasp of the Nouns and Verbs 
and will further lead to the development of strong understand- 
ing, reading and writing skills gradually and effectively. 


Sub-units of the Grammar Study 

In addition, all other sub-branches of grammar study, such as (a) 
word-analysis (abbreviated as WA), (b) Etymological Definition 
(ED) and (c) the study of structural morphology (SM) are to be 
included in this important process of Padasikkha. Those wishing 
to have a more scholarly grasp of the language should include 
these sub-branches in their study so that the study itself becomes 
a multi-faceted and multi-disciplined approach for a more ad- 
vanced, skill-oriented, in-depth learning. This approach of study 
is very effective in the development of scholarly skills and a 
thorough understanding of Pali in its entirety. 


Vakyasikkha, The study of sentences 
The next step "Vakyasikkha", the study of sentences, should be 
done progressively by studying suitable minor readings and a 
small collection of easy texts and verses from the scriptural 
sources. This will immerse the student in the actual language, 
keeping him in touch with the vocabulary of new words, various 
usages of both literary and figurative styles in addition to rich 
structural pattern of the sentences. With strong determination 
and persistent effort, the student should proceed studying the 
whole length of some selectively chosen short Suttas. It is rec- 


34 


Introduction 


ommended to start with the following: (a) Bodhikatha (It is a 
very inspiring account on the early days of Buddha's enlighten- 
ment) (b) Dhamma cakka pavattana Sutta, (c) Anattalakkhana 
Sutta, (these are from Mahavagga Pali, Vinaya Pitaka) (d) 
Mahasati patthana Sutta, (e) Dhammapada verses etc. 


How to study the Kaccayana's text? 

There are eight chapters in the Kaccayana text. The core of 
each chapter which forms the important part are a collection of 
673 grammatical rules. The rules are further clarified by the 
Vutti and word-examples whose structural patterns are to be 
brought to completion by means of applying those rules. The 
rules are short and pithy descriptions of injunctions enclosed in 
a short sentence-structure called Sutta. It literally means "the 
thread" used as a measurement tool by the carpenters of ancient 
times for cutting the wood in the prescribed measures. 


The Components of a Sutta 
A Sutta mainly consists of three components. They are: (a) Sutta 
(a brief and concise rule), (b) Vutti (explanatory sentences clari- 
fying the rule) and (c) Udaharana (applicable examples drawn 
from the scriptures) and Paccudaharana (inapplicable examples). 
See the kinds of Suttas and the roles of each Sutta explained in 
the table below: 


35 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 





No. Sutta Type 


Sutta Rule Classification 





1 Sanna Sutta 


outlines the formal terms and some basic 
preliminaries of the grammar. 





2 Adhikara Sutta 


influences the nature of other related Suttas. 





3 Paribhasa Sutta 


general announcements on the grammatical 
outline serving as a general directive. 








4 Vidhi Sutta 








enjoins various kinds of rules and procedures 
to be applied in the Pali morphology showing 
the evolution of actual word-formation and 
structural linguistics. 





Of these four kinds of Sutta, Vidhi Suttas play quite important 
roles as they enjoin the rules to perform various specific func- 
tions and morphological procedures. The term "vidhi" means 
function to be carried out for completing the word. It is classi- 
fied into eight groups according to the functions they perform. 
See the table below to understand clearly. 


36 





Introduction 


Types of Vidhi (functions) 











No Name of Vidhi Function 
1 Lopa (means to elide, to elides a vowel, or consonant or a 
delete) niggahita or an affix or a vibhatti 
or even the whole word. 
2 adesa (to change or to transforms either of above (vow- 
substitute) els etc,) into different syllables. 


These kind of Suttas usually 
have various functions, such as 
changing the whole word into 
another word-form, Vuddhi, 
Vipriyaya, Pakati, Atidesa and 
so on, are also included. 
































3 agama (to come and inserts a new syllable into a 
insert) word to become a complete 

word. 

4 digha (to lengthen) lengthens the short vowel of a 
word. 

5 rassa (to shorten) shortens a long vowel. 

[7 patisedha (to debar) debars a specific function of a 
Sutta as it 1s inapplicable. 

7 paccaya (an affix) applies an affix. 

Bes Svibhatti (a vibhatti) applies a vibhatti after a noun or 
a verb. 





The Recommended Order of the Study 
As a beginner, it is not necessary to go through all the passag- 
es of the grammatical text in the arranged order of the chap- 
ters although one may do so for the purpose of orientation and 
familiarization with each chapter. Begin the practical learning 
guide shown in the table by order of numerical sequence. Try to 
understand the meanings of various Suttas in the recommended 
order of chapters. Learn to recognize the enjoined rules and rel- 


3 The term "vibhatti" refers to noun case-endings and verb-terminations. 


37 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


evant examples. Then check how the enjoined function of a Sut- 
ta matches the way selected example words are being structured 
to become a complete word. Priority should be given to the 
recommended chapter sequence when studying Pali grammar 
using this practical reference guide. 


Pali Grammar Study Guide 





Chapter Explains about: 





Grammar Fundamentals & Sandhi. 





Nouns. 








Kita-affixed nouns and some verbs. 





1 
2 
[6 | Verbs. 
7 
BE 


Unadi-affixed nouns and a few verbs. 
(Can skip this chapter to study after all chapters) 





4 Compound nouns. 





5 Taddhita-affixed nouns. 








3 Case-endings of nouns specifically termed as 
Karaka and non-Karaka. 











Chapter One 

In this chapter, Sandhi (euphonic combination of words) will 
provide the student with some fundamentals of grammatical 
terms and concepts. Sandhi is one specific feature of the ancient 
Indo-Aryan languages such as Sanskrit and Pali. It is somewhat 
similar to the contracted word-forms in the English such as 
He'll, I've, etc. Sandhi is formed by combining two different 
words into one, so that verbal expressions are smooth and con- 
cise. Sometimes it may occur in one single word where multiple 
upasagga (prefixes) particles are present in its structure. 


Types of Sandhi 
Sandhi is usually formed through the union of vowels of two 
different words or one single word. Sometimes it may occur at 
the union of an end-vowel of the front word and the initial con- 
sonant of the next word. Sometimes it may occur at the union of 


38 


Introduction 


a niggahita dot of the front word and an initial vowel or the con- 
sonant of the next word. In order to better understand this, one 
needs to know about different types of Sandhi. See the table be- 
low: 

According to Rüpasiddhi, there are four types of Sandhi: 





No. Sandhi Type Sandhi Formation 





1 Sara-sandhi union of two vowels, one being the end- 
vowel of the preceding word, the other 
being the initial vowel of the second 
word to be united. 





2 Vyafijana-sandhi | union of the end-vowel of the preceding 
word and an initial consonant of the 
next word in a would-be combination. 





3 Niggahita-sandhi | union of niggahita in the initial word 
with either a vowel or consonant of the 
next following word. 








4 Pakati-sandhi retaining the status quo of the structural 
pattern of two or more words without 
performing any specific procedure. 











In the initial stage of study, unless one is a highly intelligent, 
sharp learner with a good memory, one need not try to under- 
stand everything. Just go through all Suttas, meanings, enjoined 
rules and relevant examples. One may test one's understanding 
by separating and combining the separated examples into a San- 
dhi on one's own. For the ease and convenience, a practical 
workshop shown as SM is provided in the first chapter. 


Chapter Two 
A more intense and focused study should be made on nouns and 
verbs, which are like major building blocks of the language. In 
this Chapter, all information regarding word structure and de- 
clension rules of the nouns are clearly explained through rele- 
vant Suttas. There is an apt saying: "If you have understood 
nouns in their entirety, then you have grasped half of the gram- 


39 





Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


mar" which is particularly relevant as the subsequent chapters of 
Samasa, Taddhita, Kita, Unadi and Karaka explain more about 
different noun patterns. 


Chapter Six 

After studying nouns in the chapter two, students should pro- 
ceed to the chapter six regarding main Pali verbs called 
"Akhyata". The two chapters are complementary as they deal 
with nouns and verbs which constitute the fundamentals of sen- 
tence construction. The additional notes at the end of the first 
section of the chapter six are really quite important as they ex- 
plain fundamental aspects of the Pali verbs in clear detail. 

It can be said or safely assumed that as soon as the second and 
the sixth chapters are thoroughly studied, the student may have 
now understood some important facts on the plain nouns and 
basic Pali verbs fundamental to a more comprehensive under- 
standing of the language and its grammar. 


Chapter Seven 

One should then proceed to study chapter seven on Kita-affixed 
nouns. In this chapter, the basic structure and morphological 
procedures of all Kita-affixed verbal nouns and words are clear- 
ly explained in more detail. Priority and more careful focus 
should be given to study Sutta Nos. 540, 555, 556, 557, 560, 
561, 562, 563, 564 and 565, to learn about the affixes which can 
be used sometimes either as main verbs or some auxiliary verbs 
such as the absolutive (also called gerund), the present participle 
and past participle. The majority of Kita-affixed words, except 
the example words shown in above Suttas, are just nouns struc- 
tured with roots and affixes. Though a student may not at first 
understand the roles played by all these Kita-affixes, one will 
slowly and firmly understand about them later on. 


40 


Introduction 


Next Important Step 

After one had made a firm grasp of understanding on the nouns 
and Akhyata verbs and some Kita-affixed words as explained in 
those chapters, one should start studying all those nouns and 
verbs together in a more practical mode of application. For this, 
Dr. Lily De Silva's book, "The Pali Primer", or "The New Pali 
course" by Venerable A.P. Buddhadatta and A.K. Warder's "In- 
troduction to Pali" are quite suitable ones to start with. These 
books will surely complement and reinforce the basic grammati- 
cal knowledge a student has acquired through the study of rec- 
ommended chapters in the ancient Kaccayana grammar text thus 
far. 


Chapter Eight 

Chapter eight, the unadi section, is like an extension or expan- 
sion of the chapter seven which further explains some more 
about words having affixes similar to Kita-affixed words of the 
previous chapter. This time, however, with a different rubric 
known as "unadi-affixes". The word "unadi" refers to the initial 
affix "nu" which has an n-joined "u". [Re: Sutta 624, example 
words with this affix such as Karu, Karuko]. All the affixes 
shown in this chapter are collectively known as "unadi-affixes". 
That is the reason why there are some Suttas with similar func- 
tions as those shown in the previous chapter. 


Priority and focused attention should be given to Suttas 625, 
626, 635, 636, 637 and 655 as there are explanations regarding 
some affixes which can be used as either verbs or auxiliary 
verbs or future participles. Most of the remaining Suttas are usu- 
ally about nouns structured with root and affixes. The study of 
this chapter is quite easy if one had done a thorough study of the 
Kita chapter as both are interrelated. 


There, the student may even find quite a few interesting affixes 
such as "kta" and "ghin" which may seem somewhat San- 


41 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


skritized. In the Sanskrit grammar texts, the affix "ta" is termed 
as "kta (क्व)". The affix "tva" is termed in Sanskrit "kta (क्त्वा)" 
while "ni" is termed as "ghinun (घिनुण)." Also, the affix "na" is 
sometimes differently termed "ghafi (zx1)". These are just a few 
examples. Actually, the Sanskrit and Pali grammars have differ- 
ent grammatical systems, morphological procedures and termi- 
nology even though they have some shared fundamentals oc- 
curred through long periods of affiliation, synthesis and shared 
ancestry in the ancient Indo-Aryan civilization. 


Chapters Four and Five 

A keen student, if he may wish so, can still decide to continue 
chapter eight or skip it to go back to study the chapter four on 
compound nouns and then chapter five on Taddhita-affixed 
nouns. These two chapters too explain about nouns of differ- 
ent structure, the former being two or more nouns conjoined in 
a process called "Samasa, the compound noun", while the latter, 
instead of being joined with another noun, is affixed with a suf- 
fix expressive of distinctive meanings and consequently have 
some distinctive structural patterns. 


Order of Suttas to study in the Samasa 

When studying the Samasa chapter, students should begin with 
Sutta 316, 317 and 318 to understand the nature of Samasa. 
Then 319, 320, 341, 342 and 343 together to learn all about 
abyayibhava. Then proceed to study 325 and 321 together to 
learn about Digu. Afterwards, proceed to study 329, 322, 323 
and 339 to learn about Dvanda compound. Then, begin with 
324, 330 and 332 to learn about Kammadharaya compound. 
Then continue 327, 326, 333, 334, 335 and 336 to learn about 
Tappurisa compound. After all this is thoroughly done, one can 
start with Sutta 328 (Skip all the long compound structures at first go), 

331, 338 and 340 to learn about Bahubbihi compound. Later on, 
one should round off all the remaining Suttas to cover all of the 


42 


Introduction 


chapter. This way, it will be more effective and quicken the 
learning process in a short time. 


As for the chapter five, just follow the Suttas as shown in this 
book under each individual heading of a Taddhita. No specific 
further recommendation is required. Actually, the study of 
uniquely-structured nouns in these two chapters is quite a fasci- 
nating learning-experience which can further enrich the gram- 
matical knowledge of the student in many ways. 


A quick study guide of Samasa: 









































Step | Sutta No Learning objective 
1 316, 317 and 318 Understand the nature of 
Samasa 
2 319, 320, 341, 342, 343 Abyayibhava 
(Adverbial Compound) 
3 325, 321 Digu (Numeral Determinative 
Compound) 
4 329, 322, 323, 339 Dvanda (Copulative Compound) 
5 324, 330, 332 Kammadharaya 
(Appositional Compound) 
aa 327,326,333,334,335,336 | Tappurisa 
(Determinative Compound) 
7 328, 331, 338, 340 Bahubbthi 
(Attributive Compound) 
un 337 Some general aspects on the 
inflection of Determinative and 
Attributive Compounds. 





Chapter Three 
When sufficient amount of time and effort is being made to 
study the chapters four and five, one should start studying chap- 
ter three. In it, all the grammatical terms of noun case-endings 
called "Karaka" and their implied meaning and usage, are ex- 
plained in detail. Although it is termed as Karaka-chapter, it 
also explains about non-Karakas and unique case-endings which 


43 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


have exceptionally special senses along with the relevant exam- 
ples. 


Both Karaka & non-Karakas form parts of a complete sentence. 
They are syntactically related to verbs as well as to each other in 
a language structure formally known as "the sentence" and play 
their respective roles such as the subject (Katta), the object 
(Kamma) or the possessive (Sami) and so on. It is not necessary 
to memorize but only required to familiarize with grammatical 
concepts, their relevant roles and practical application in the ac- 
tual expression of verbalized or written language. To simply put, 
the chapter three, after all, is like a continuation of the chapter 
two regarding nouns. 


Sub-Units of the Grammar Study 
There are other sub-units of Pali grammar study as outlined 
below: 

















No Sub-Unit Title Abbreviation Used 
1 Etymological Definition: ED 
Viggaha-vakya 
2 Word Analysis: Pada-vicaya | WA 
3 Structural Morphology: SM 
Rüpasiddhi 











The ED, which stands being abbreviated for the Etymological 
Definition, called "Viggaha-vakya" in Pali (similarly termed 
विग्रहवाक्य in Sanskrit) is a process of expansion and explanation 
of the original example words shown in some Suttas. In chapters 
4, 5, 7 and 8, the students will have to go through some form of 
grammatical sub-unit of the study termed EDs. This ED is an 
important feature which forms part and parcel of a complete 
grammatical text. The student, as a beginner does not yet 
need to study EDs in the initial phase of learning except a 
casual light-reading through all those translated examples of 


44 





Introduction 


EDs and try to get some familiarity with it, so that one will get 
used to it later on. This will help a lot in smoothly moving 
through all the chapters without bumping into any hard-to- 
understand word or phrases which may pose unnecessary chal- 
lenge to the beginner. 


Knowing and understanding the ED as well as being able to 
write a relevant ED of a word, is in fact one special character- 
istic of a true Pali scholar. One cannot develop this skill in the 
beginning as it takes considerable amount of time and study. A 
student only needs to be able to understand its basic meaning 
and the resultant structure of a word by examining its ED. 
Therefore, it is not yet at all necessary to prioritize the study of 
EDs in the initial phase of learning. 


Three Kinds of EDs 

There are three different categories of EDs classified as per the 

respective chapters. They are: 

(1) Samasa-Viggaha, compound EDs for those examples shown 
in the Samasa-chapter, 

(2) Taddhita Viggaha, the ED of Taddhita-affixed nouns for 
the examples shown in the Taddhita-chapter, 

(3) Kita-Viggaha, the ED of Kita-affixed words in the Kita 
chapter and the Unadi chapters. 


Of these three, 

(a) The compound ED explains how each relevant noun is con- 
joined in a compounding process, using any applicable case- 
ending of nouns, Upasagga or Nipdta particles, according to 
a specific category of the compound a word belongs to. Once 
a student can clearly understand its ED, he will then be in- 
stantly able to tell what kind of a particular compound the ex- 
ample word belongs to. 

(b) Taddhita-viggaha, the ED of Taddhita-affixed nouns, 
usually explains the base word and the implied meaning of 


45 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


its component affix by means of using relevant explanatory 
words or phrases. By understanding it, one will be able to dis- 
sect the complete make-up of a Taddhita-affixed noun in a 
very simple way. The student will also understand what spe- 
cific kind of Taddhita-class it belongs to. 

(c) The last is Kita-viggaha, the ED of Kita & Unadi-affixed 
nouns. This kind of Kita-ED explains the meaning of the 
root of example word, together with the respective "Sadhana- 
meaning" of the affix comprised in an example. It is in the 
ED of Kita-affixed words where so-called seven Sadhana are 
originated. Usually a Kita-ED may employ an Akhyata verb 
or a Kita-verb which is synonymous with the root's meaning 
in one of three voices to signify the relevant Sadhana of Kita- 
affixed-word, either it be a Kattu or Kamma or Bhava. Some- 
times, a substitute verb with approximate meaning may also 
be employed in the ED. 


If an example word belongs to other four Sadhanas such as 
Karana, Sampadana, Apadana or Adhikarana, it may use addi- 
tional Sabbanama-nouns such as tena, etena, yena (Instrumental 
case for Karana Sadhana examples) Tassa, assa (Dative for Sampadana 
Sadhana), Tasma, yasma, asma, yato, (Ablative for Apadana 
Sadhana) Ettha, Yasmim (Locative for Adhikarana Sadhana) and so 
on. These additional words are called "Sadhana-indicators". It 
is quite interesting to learn about EDs and their role in exposing 
the structural dynamics of a word and its relevant semantics alt- 
hough one may at first find it a bit confusing and challenging. In 
consideration of the benefits a student can acquire through the 
study of EDs, it does not need to further emphasize nor overrate 
on its role. It is up to the personal capacity and convenience of 
the student either to pay some amount of focused attention or 
just pass it by through cursory glance. It should be noted that 
some examples may have an ED, while some words may be 
without it. If a student has made a thorough study and possess 
some degree of comprehensive knowledge of the chapter two, 


46 


Introduction 


six and seven, studying different kinds of EDs will not pose a 
problem. 


WA (Word Analysis) 
The next important part is to have a firm grasp of Pali words by 
clearly understanding its complete make-up (for Akhyata & 
Kita-affixed words), and the related name of Samasa and Tad- 
dhita (for compound and Taddhita-affixed nouns). One can ac- 
quire this skill by studying WA, an acronym abbreviated for the 
word analysis. 


This, in fact, is not an original sub-branch of the grammatical 
study included in the text, but a latter-day development devised 
by the wise, far-sighted teachers of the grammar in ancient times 
for easy development of the necessary word-analysis skill of the 
students. 


If truth be told, a well-trained grammatical student should have 
this "WA skill" known in Pali as "Padavicayafiana [Pada-word+ 
vicaya-analysis-fiàna-knowledge]" Or "pada vicarana [pada-vicarana- 
analysis]." Having this skill greatly helps the student to gain a high 
level of mastery on the Pali words. It will also help the student 
to be able to build any form of correct and suitable word in the 
language with much efficiency and skill. 


Therefore, this word analysis feature (WA) is included in almost 
every Sutta of the chapters 5, 6, 7 and 8. The students do not 
need to memorize them at all but make some careful study of it 
so that necessary grammatical skills will gradually increase as 
the student proceeds through various chapters. 


47 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


$Rüpasiddhi or Payogasiddhi 
(The Structural Morphology, SM) 
Another equally important part of the grammar study is under- 
standing the structural morphology of words known as "Rüpa 
siddhi or Payogasiddhi." This is also a sub-branch of the gram- 
matical study which can be said as already included in the Suttas 
but not in a complete detail under any formal name. 


As a matter of fact, Pali grammar, like its cousin Sanskrit 
grammars, explains about the grammatical rules and brief mor- 
phological procedures with an aim to show how each word is 
basically structured and how it is brought to completion to be- 
come a coherent word by means of applying the functions of 
relevant Suttas. If seen from the perspective of objective analy- 
sis, the study of Kaccayana grammar or other similar grammati- 
cal texts of the Indo-Aryan Languages, is the science of pure 
linguistics which may be seemingly quite different from the way 
modern-day contemporary grammars are structured and de- 
signed. 


This branch of SM study is a very beneficial process as it can 
strengthen the understanding of a Sutta and its related functions. 
It can also reinforce the knowledge and skill of understanding 
on the gradual evolution process of a word till it finally becomes 
a complete word. This feature abbreviated as SM is included in 
the first chapter of Sandhi but not in the remaining chapters for 
the sake of making this translation work less bulky and less 
challenging for the students. 








ÓRüpa-word--siddhi-mode and method of completion, Payoga-example. 


48 


Introduction 


Through this feature, the grammatical information as to how a 
separated Sandhi-example is recombined into a perfect Sandhi 
by applying the relevant function of each applicable Sutta, is 
clearly explained in a step-by-step detail. The study of Rüpasid- 
dhi may not be possible without the aid of a truly competent 
teacher or a reliable guidebook, such as the one written by the 
late Tha-bye-kan Sayadaw Bhaddanta Ukkamsacara, a very 
well-known, highly respected, Pali, Hindi, and Sanskrit scholar 
of Burma. In the days gone-by in countries where the study of 
Pali is pursued in a more strict systematic manner, this step 
along with memorization of the whole of Kaccayana text, is a 
necessity and always emphasized. Those who have had included 
this sub-branch in their study, become very competent Pali stu- 
dents and scholars. 


Footnotes 

There are important additional notes inserted in the form of 
footnotes wherever necessary. They are intended to be part of 
the required readings for all keen students as they contain essen- 
tial information for the development of overall grammatical 
knowledge and the skills. Therefore, it need not be further em- 
phasized to be part of an inclusive study regimen for all serious 
students. 


Appendix 

There is also an appendix section at the end of the book which 
provides some essentially necessary grammatical information 
for the serious student. The sample morphology, the Karaka & 
Sadhana and the Pali-root index are some of the subtle areas of 
grammatical skills and study. Proceeding through those sections 
will not only enrich but also broaden the scope of understanding 
and the grammatical knowledge. Therefore, it is encouraged to 
read the appendices section. 


49 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


Generalized Understanding 

When studying an ancient language such as Pali, it is quite nec- 
essarily important to have a balanced as well as relaxed attitude 
toward the subject of study. One should neither push oneself too 
much nor be inert. So, there are two scenarios and choices. One 
is a casual student whose aim and purpose is only to be able to 
read and understand Pali to some degree. The other is a serious 
student with keen interest, whose aim is not only to be able to 
read and understand, but also to be able to write the flawless Pali 
by gaining some substantial amount of mastery on it. For both of 
them, having a generalized understanding of the subject is the 
first necessary step and an important key to further progress 
which one has to decide for a more intensive and progressively 
detailed study. 


Therefore, students should start their study by going through 
various Suttas in the recommended order of the chapters, try to 
understand their meanings, the enjoined rules and relevant ex- 
amples as shown in each translation. Then check how the en- 
joined function of a Sutta matches the way example words are 
accordingly structured and completed. If the student finds that 
what one has learned is as it is explained in the Sutta, then it can 
be assumed that one has been coming along well and made some 
progress in the first step. The students will surely have some de- 
gree of understanding of whatever is read and studied and thus 
be ready to progress much further. It is not at all necessary to 
understand everything in the text even though having a more 
substantial way of understanding is far more preferable than 
having a vague understanding. It is sincerely and firmly hoped 
that with strong determination, consistent efforts combined with 
graduated steps of the study, students will certainly progress in 
the learning process of Pali in a minimum span of two to three 
years. This is what this English translation work is specifically 
and mainly intended for. 


50 


Pronunciation Guide 
Pronunciation Guide 


The Eight vowels 
Except a few special ones unique to Pali, the majority of ordinary Pali alpha- 
bets are pronounced like basic normal sound of English words. The following 
are the sample sounds of individual vowels. Please take only the sound of 
underlined words, not of the whole word nor of any consonant. 


(1) a to be pronounced as in amid, about 
(2) à to pronounce as in far 

(3) i as in meet, eat 

(4) as in we, he 

(5) u as in shoot 

(6) ū as in you, beauty 

(7) e as in way 

(8) 0 as in all, auto 


The Consonants 
There is an “a” after each consonant which is added for easy utterance or 
producing an articulate sound of the respective consonants. There are five 
groups comprising five consonants in each which is called “vagga”. On the 
other hand, there are non-vagga consonants comprising seven consonants and 
one niggahita. 


Ka-group 
This group of consonants are velar (guttural). 
Note: In each group, every second and fourth consonants are aspirated. As a 
physical sign, there is an “h” which symbolizes the stress. So, it has to be 
pronounced with the stress and a puff of air being released. 


The first and the third are unaspirated. So, they are pronounced normally 
without stress. The fifth ones in each vagga-group are nasals. 


(1) Ka as in Kab 

(2) Kha as in khaki, khmer 
(3) Ga as in glad 

(4) Gha as in ghat 

(5) Na as in sing, John Ng 


51 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


Ca-group 
This group of consonants are palatal. 
(1) Ca as in Ciao (Italian greeting word) 
(2) Cha as in Charge, charity 
(3) Ja as in jab 
(4) Jha as in jack 
Note: See en.oxforddictionaries.com for the sound of "Ciao." There is a 


slight variation of the sound for both “J and Jh" which are pronounced as 
“za” and “zha” in Burmese. 


(5) Na as in Lasagna, signor, signora (It is a nasal sound) 











Ta-group 
This group of consonants are retroflex, to be pronounced with 
the tongue being pulled backward away from the teeth and 
slightly touching the upper palate. 
(1) Ta as in tea 
(2) Tha as in train 
(3) Da as in disc 
(4) Dha as in dart 
(5) Na as in Nagoya 


Ta-group 
This group of consonants are dental, to be pronounced with the 
tip of tongue touched against upper teeth or the ridge behind the 
upper teeth. 
(1) Ta as in tachometer 
(2) Tha as in try or train 
(3) Da as in daffodil 
(4) Dha as in dark 
(5) Na as in nab 


Pa-group 
This group of consonants are labial, to be pronounced with lips 
gently touched against each other and then quickly opened. 
(1) Pa as in pacific 


52 


Pronunciation Guide 


(2) Pha as in Facility, phacelia 
(3) Ba as in basalt 

(4) Bha as in bath 

(5) Ma as in macau 


Seven Non-Vagga group consonants 

(1) Ya as in yacht, yak 

(2) Ra as in rabbit 

(3) La as in lab (to be pronounced with the tip of tongue gently touching 
the upper teeth.) 

(4) La as in lasagna (Actually, this is very much the same as ordi- 
nary *la"). To be pronounced with the mouth being slightly 
opened, with the tip of tongue slightly touching the upper palate. 
Note: This is one special “L” with a different dot down below which is 
unique only to Sanskrit and Pali. In the grammatical texts, it is men- 
tioned as being homogenous and interchangeable with ordinary “L” de- 
spite having slight physical difference. 

(5) Wa as in warp, vat (Both sounds of w & v are permissible) 

Note: In the grammatical text, there will be more of “v” such as “kvaci, 
va and so on" though it is rather pronounced as “w” in majority of cases. 
For example, the word “Kvaci” is pronounced as Kuaci or kwaci, while 


a? 


“vā” is sounded as wa. In Asian syllabary such as Devanagari and Bur- 
mese, there are only two representations of “v & w”. For example, “v” is 
shown as “ब-०” while “w” is written as “a-o”. However, in Romanized 
Pali, “v” is sometimes represented as “b” while “w” is shown by both 
ways either as “v” or “w”. Therefore, keep in mind that all these three of 
*b, v & w" are basically as well as morphologically homogenous to each 
other. This fact will become even clearer when studying the morphologi- 


[TEE ८८,299 


cal procedures of the Pali words which comprise either “v” or “w”. 


One Sibilant 
(6) Sa as in sabbath 


One Aspirate sound 
(7) Ha as in habit, half 


53 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


Niggahita dot 
This Niggahita “upper-dot” is semi-vowel as well as a semi- 
consonant though it is classified as a byafijana, (i.e. consonant in 
the grammatical text) 
(1) m as in am 


Note: This “th” is interchangeable with all the fifth syllables “ñ, fi, n, n, m^ 
of the five vagga-groups through applicable morphological procedure. This 
means that “th” can change into any consonant form of “ñ, ñ, n, n, m". These 
fives are called “vagganta” which means the group-endings [vagga-group+ 
anta-ending]. Sometimes, it is also referred to as “five nasal stops". 


54 


Guide to Conjuncts 


Guide to Conjuncts 


A conjunct is a cluster of consonants combined together by be- 
ing based on a single vowel. Such a structure is technically 
called *samyoga" in grammatical term. Most conjuncts in Asian 
languages are written either in horizontal or vertical structure 
(Refer to the preface of this book). Depending on how it is writ- 
ten, one has to read it from left to right or up to down. In Ro- 
manized Pali, it is written in horizontal style which is much eas- 
ier to read from left to right. [sarnyoga=sarh-together+yoga-to bind, to join, 


i.e. being joined together, conjunct] 


There are two types of conjuncts: 
(a) conjuncts of similar consonants, 
(b) conjuncts of dissimilar consonants. 


Of the two, conjuncts of similar consonants usually occur: 

(1) in the first and third consonants of five vagga-groups, 

(2) also in the last four “fi, n, n, m" of five vagga-group with 
the exception of “ñ” of Ka-group. Of non-vagga consonants, 
conjuncts also occur in y, l, w, s. There are no conjuncts of sim- 
ilar consonants found to be combined with the four conso- 
nants “n, r, |, h”. This kind of conjunct is formed due mainly to: 
(a) the rule of Sutta No. 28, 

(b) other applicable morphological procedures, and 

(c) the natural structure of the word itself. One of these three 
causes lead to the formation of conjuncts of similar conso- 
nants. 


55 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


Conjuncts of similar consonants 
Vagga-group similar conjuncts 
(Ka-group) kka, gga, 
(Ca group) cca, jja, fiiia, 
(Tagroup)tta, dda, nna, 
(Tagroup)tta, 009, nna, 
(Pa group) ppa, bba, mma, 


Non-vagga group similar conjuncts 
yya, lla, vva, (Being morphologically homogenous and interchangeable, it 
is also sometimes written as bba), ssa, 


Conjuncts of Dissimilar Consonants 
As for the conjuncts of dissimilar consonants, it used to occur in 
the second, fourth and the fifth of vagga-group consonants. 
However, this explanation is only about general patterns from 
the grammatical perspective, not a complete description. There 
are diverse varieties of anomalous conjunct-formation of dissim- 
ilar consonants found in the Pali texts caused and mainly influ- 
enced by: 
(a) the rule of Sutta No. 29, 
(b) other relevant applicable morphological procedures, and 
(c) the natural structure of the word itself. One of these three 
causes may lead to the formation of such conjuncts of dis- 
similar consonants. The following is a list of such dissimilar 
conjuncts found in various Pali literature. By studying the list 
carefully, one will easily understand how these conjunct-words 
are formed. 

Vagga Conjuncts 

(1st vagga) kkha, ggha (2nd Vagga) ccha, jjha (3rd Vagga) ttha, ddha 
(4th Vagga) ttha, ddha (5th Vagga) ppha, bbha (Refer to function of 
Sutta No. 29) 


The following conjuncts are formed by joining the last of vagga 
with its own group. Please carefully study so that it becomes 


56 


Guide to Conjuncts 


much easier to understand some of the fixed pattern of such dis- 
similar conjuncts. Actually, this pattern is as what is described 
in the rule of Sutta number 31. 

(Conjuncts with the last alphabet “ñ” of 1st Vagga) hka, nkha, nga, hgha 
(Conjuncts with the last alphabet “fi” of 2nd Vagga) fica, ficha, fija, fijha 
(Conjuncts with the last alphabet “n” of 3rd Vagga) nta, ntha, nda, ndha 
(Conjuncts with the last alphabet “n” of 4th Vagga) nta, ntha, nda, ndha 
(Conjuncts with the last alphabet “m” of Sth Vagga) mpa, mpha, mba, 
mbha 


Non-vagga Conjuncts 
1. Dissimilar conjuncts with non-vagga “‘ya” (This type of conjuncts 
with “ya” are usually found in the grammatical texts) 
(1st) kya, khya, gya, (2nd) cya, (3rd) tya, dya, nya (4th) tya, thya, 
dya, dhya, nya (5th) pya, phya, bya & vya, bhya, mya (non- 
vagga) lya, sya, 
Dissimilar conjuncts with non-vagga “ra” 
(1st) kra, kri, (4) tra, tri, dra, dri (5) bru 
(with non-vagga “sa” & “ta”) stra 
3. Two dissimilar conjuncts with non-vagga “la” 
(1st) kla (5th) pla 
4. Eight dissimilar conjuncts with non-vagga “va” 
kva, khva, nva, tva, dva, nva (Non-vagga) sva, hva 
5. One dissimilar conjuncts with non-vagga “sa” 
sta as in Usto-shocked. 
5. Nine Dissimilar conjuncts with non-vagga “ha” 
fiha, nha, nha, mha, 
(Non-vagga) yha, rha, lha, vha, Iha, 


Triple conjuncts 
Note: Triple conjuncts are quite rarely found except a few words. 
(1) ndri as in Indriya-faculty. 
(2) ntva as in Gantva-having gone 
Note: There is no quadri-conjuncts found in the texts. Keep in mind that 
these shown above are only a common list of conjuncts which used to be 
found in a wider source of Pali literature, not a limitation of other possible 


57 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


forms of conjuncts. As a general rule of grammar, any acceptable conjunct 
coined within the confines of grammatical logic and relevant morphological 
applicability is still possible depending on the skill and discretion of the au- 
thor. “Patadihyalarh, Cyadihi Ivaro, Sasvadthi tudavo (See the underlined 
conjuncts)” are such examples among applicable possibilities found in this 
gammatical text. 


Vowel Conjuncts? 

In Sanskrit, there are some vowels such as V , ait, classified as 
diphthongs. But in Pali, there are absolutely no such vowels. 
The vowels are like foundations where generally one or two or 
three consonants are based to produce a clear, well-articulated 
sound. In order to produce such sound of an individual conso- 
nant or two to three consonants in a cluster-formation, one vow- 
el alone is sufficient. The rules of Suttas 12 & 83 clearly indi- 
cate this fixed linguistic pattern of morphology as stipulated in 
the Pali grammatical texts. 


58 


Key to Entries 


Key to Entries 






THE NUMBER OF SUTTA 
THE NUMBER OF THIS SUTTA IN RÜPASIDDHI GRAMMAR 


[à THE SUTTA (THE GRAMMATICAL RULE) 
VUTTI PALI THE PARSING OF SUTTA AND THE AMOUNT OF 
WORDS CONTAINED IN SUTTA ARE SHOWN 
INSIDE BRACKET 


140, 232. Tva पव ca | simhi ca. 

[Tvarh, aharh+simhitca. 3] 

[V] Sabbesarh tumha, amhasaddanarh savibhattinam tvar, 
ahar, icce’te adesa honti yathasankhyam simhi vibhattimhi. 
The whole words “tumha and amha” changes into “tvar, 
aham" respectively along with vibhatti “si” applied after 
them. 


(Tumha+si=tvarh, Amha-si-aham)«—— SIMPLIFIED EXPLANATION OF FUNCTION 
| T vam-you. ® Aharh-L@s.) << CASE-ENDING CODE 


i kimattharh? 

What is the word "simhi" for? 

To show that in the examples below, the function of Sutta is 
inapplicable as they are not of “si”, but of “smith”. 

* Tayi. * Mayi. (Refer to Sutta 139) 

= tuvarh ca hoti, ST |. "etm 
By means of “ca” in the Sutta, tumha also changes into “tu- 
vam" (together with vibhatti) when “si” is applied after it. 
° Tuvarh-you. ns. Sattha-(are) teacher. nv. i.e. You are teacher. 


EXAMPLES OF SPLIT-SUTTA SIMPLIFIED MEANING 


EXTRA FUNCTION APPLICABLE 
VIA PART OF SUTTA (ALSO 


CALLED SPLIT-SUTTA FUNC- 
TION) 


DIALECTIC 
EXAMPLES OF THE SUTTA | 





59 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


List of Abbreviations 
(The Grammatical Codes) 


Case-endings 
(Shown in order of cases) 
ns..Nominative singular 
np..Nominative plural 
vs..Vocative singular 
vp..Vocative plural 
as..Accusative singular 
ap..Accusative plural 
is.. Instrumental singular 
ip..Instrumental plural 
ds..Dative singular 
dp..Dative plural 
abs..Ablative singular 
abp..Ablative plural 
gs..Genitive singular 
gp..Genitive plural 
Is..Locative singular 
Ip..Locative plural 


Speciality Case-endings in the Extraordinary Senses 
Nominative: 
nas, nap..Nominative in Accusative. This type of case-ending 
plays the role of an object (Vutta-Kamma, principal object) in a 
passive voice sentence. 


Accusative: 

als..Accusative in locative sense singular which means “at, in” 
e.g. ekam samayam, pubbanhasamayam, ekamantam (Only sin- 
gular is commonly found in the Pali texts. Therefore, plural case 
in this sense is inapplicable) aas, aap..Accusative of accan- 
tasamyoga (on-going condition) which means “till, until, for a 
period of, for a certain distance of". 


60 


List of Abbreviations 


Instrumental: 

iss, isp..Instrumental Subject singular or plural which means 
“by”. This type of case-ending plays the role of non-principal 
Subject (avutta-katta) in a passive voice sentence. 


irs, irp..Instrumental of Reason singular or plural which means 
“by means of, due to". 


Ablative: 
abrs, abrp..Ablative of Reason. It means "for reason of, due to". 


Genitive: 

gns, gnp..Genitive in Nominative, also ags, agp..Agent Genitive 
(Kattvattha-chatth7). It means like an ordinary nominative but 
plays “the role of a subject". This type of case-ending is usually 
found in wider areas of Pali texts in the context of either a pas- 
sive participle Kita-noun or a passive-voiced Akhyata verb. 

gas, gap..Genitive in Accusative, also called Patient-Genitive or 
Kammattha chatthi. It means “to” like an ordinary Kamma but 
plays “the role of an object". 


This type of case-ending is also found in the Pali texts in the 
context of a passive participle Kita-noun or an Akhyata verb of 
passive voice structure. 


gsp..Genitive of Selection plural, also called niddharana 
chatthi. It means “among, amid, out of". 
Note: Singular-case is inapplicable in such usage. 


cgs..Concurrent-Genitive singular 


cgp..Concurrent Genitive plural 

(Also referred to as anadara or absolute chatthi) 

Note: This case-ending is usually an anddara expression de- 
pending on the context. 


61 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


Locative: 
cls..Concurrent Locative singular 


clp..Concurrent Locative plural. 
(Also referred to as absolute sattamt or lakkhana sattami, but 
in some cases, it can be an anadara sattami too) 


Ir, Locative of Reason, also called nimitta sattami. 

Note: This case-ending is frequently found in the majority of 
Suttas as well as throughout all grammatical text. It is usually a 
reason-descriptive Locative-case called Nimitta-sattami in the 
grammatical terms. However, sometimes it may be an anddara 
or a Lakkhana expression depending on the contextual aspect. 


Examples of nimitta sattami: 
Sare pare (Sutta No.12), pubbasare lutte(14) se vibhattimhi(61) 
sam,sasu ekavacanesu vibhattadesesu(62) 


Iss, Isp..Locative of Selection also called niddharana sattami. 
Iss is seldom found in the Pali texts though applicable. 


Specific terms based on the structure or syntactic context: 
ab..Absolutive (also called gerund). 
adj..Adjective 

adv..Adverb 

ay..Akhyata verb 

cn..Compound noun 

ger..Gerund 

ind..Indeclinable 

inf..Infinitive 

kn..Kita noun 

kv..Kita verb 

ni..Nipata particle 

n..Noun 

nn..Numerical noun 


62 


List of Abbreviations 


prp..Present participle 
pp..Past participle 
sn..Sabbanama noun 
tn..Taddhita noun 
up..Upasagga particle 


Other Abbreviations 

A: Answer 

B. Bahubbthi 

CS..Combination of Sandhi 

ED..Etymological Definition also called Viggaha. 

e.g. for example. 

Function means the application of the Sutta's rule to be applied 
on the example as stipulated by the rule of Sutta. 
MA..Morphological Analysis. 

Q: question 

S..Sutta, short aphorisms which concisely explains a grammati- 
cal rule or principle. 

SS..Separation of Sandhi 

SM..Structural morphology 

V..Vutti, explanatory words of a Sutta 

WA... Word analysis 

' ° This apostrophe is a sign of Sandhi, euphonic combination. 
It shows a hidden Sandhi procedure in the combined words 
which will be found throughout this grammatical text. 
>becomes. Therefore. 

<reversed. 

=(a) equals to. (b) Sometimes it indicates an ED in front of an 
example word in Taddhita, Akyata, Kita and Unadi sections. 

(c) Sometimes it indicates WA of an example such as parsing 
into various parts and showing the meaning of each component. 
y preceded by (as by an Upasagga or nipdta prefix) 

७ example word applicable by the function of Sutta or any of 
split-Sutta function or a component word of Sutta. 


63 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


* Inapplicable example word by the rule of the Sutta. 

(...) The words inside parenthesis are not translations from the 
original texts but complementary and explanatory words 
intentionally included for the purpose of easy understanding. 


Note: These codes are devised and used for the ease and con- 
venience of grammar study. Without the aid of such codes, the 
students will find it difficult to understand the important syntac- 
tical relation of words and their implied meaning in a sentence. 
Only a few essential ones are chosen and improvised after care- 
ful analysis and research. 


64 


Frequently found words 
Frequently Found Words 


adeso-to change, i.e. the function applicable by the rule of Sutta. 
apajjate, apajjante-literally it means “to reach a morphologically 
changed state of". av. 
Icce'vam'adr-ete, [iccevamadi=ititevarhtadi. adi-means “etc., so on". 
iti and evam are indeclinable particles, redundant usage of two indicatives] 
Iccevamadi yojetabba-and so on, should be applied. [yujattabba, kv] 
Iccete, Iccanena, Iccetassassa, Iccetesam, also of the same mean- 
ing in different case-endings. All these words are dual indicatives which 
comprise “iti-as+ima-this”. They emphatically mean “such this word", an 
equivalent of English expression such as “this very man", “that very day". 
Iti-This word serves as: 
(a) indicative, which means “as, thus". Usually found after the very word 

it emphatically indicates. 

e.g. Yutte'ti Kasma? [yutte-iti kasma, Sutta No.11] 

Why is this word as “Yutte” said here? 

(b) a disjunctive which is expressive of the end of a section, usually found 

at the end of a section or a chapter. 

e.g. Iti sandhikappe pathamo kando 

the first section of Sandhi ends. ind. 
Evam-thus, similarly, in the same manner. [a nipata particle, ind.] 
Bhavaniddesena-by a component part of Sutta structured in an abstract 
Taddhita affix “tta” such as anattam (See Sutta 211), kasattam (Sutta 491). 
[bhava-in abstract formationt+niddesa-statement, cn. | 
Dhatu-Root, Dhatva’ntassa (Sutta 615) [dhatu-roott+anta-parts+ssa-of 
gs] 
Part of the root such as vowel or consonant contained in the root is called 
dhatvanta] 
Hoti-is, Honti-are. äv. [hū+a+ti or anti.]. 
Kasma-why, for what reason. [ka-what*sma-is an ablative case-ending. 
See Sutta No. 55 to understand this suffix. Both ko and ka derived from 
kim. See Sutta No. 229 to understand this morphological change. | 
Karo-sometimes it refers to a certain syllable if used after alphabets such 
as a-karo-the syllable “a”, ya-karo-the syllable “ya” etc. Sometimes it 
means “to change into a, ya" etc.,. In the latter sense, it is an equivalent of 
*adeso". 


65 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


Kara'deso-this means to change, to be substituted with, to transform into, 
which implies the function applicable by the rule of Sutta. It also has the 
same meaning as the word “adesa”. A compound noun [kara-adesa, cn]. 
Kima’ttharh-For what purpose? This usage is also the same as kva’ttho. 
[kirh-whatrattharh-purpose, result, kva’ttho-ko+attho, cn.] 

Kvaci-at some instances, optionally. ind..[kirht+vatci, dual suffixed kim] 
Kva'ttho-what benefit? [kva’ttho=ko-whattattho-benefit, result. cn.] 
Nava, Vibhasa (also of the same meaning like *kvaci". ind.) 
Nipajjate, Nipajjante-completed, finished. av.[nivpadatya+te or ante.] 
Puna-again. ind. 

Suttavibhagena-by splitting part of Sutta. [Sutta+vibhaga-splitting, cn, 
is| 
Tam Yatha? For example. [Tarh-that. It is a Sabbanama noun “ta” in 
nominative case “si” which have been transformed into an “am” as it belongs 
to neuter at this point of usage. See Sutta No. 219 to understand this change. 
Yatha-is a Nipdta particle which indicates question. It is more like a question 
mark? and also ind. | 
Tava-first. Usually this word serves as an introductory to the next phase of 
statement or explanation though being interpreted as “first”. [an indeclinable 
Nipata particle. ind.] 

Tena-by that. [It is a Sabbanama noun “ta” in instrumental case “na” which 
have been transformed into “ena”. See Sutta No. 103.] 
Yathajinavacana’nuparodhena-not contravening the words of Bud- 
dha. i.e. according to usage in Pali canon. [Yatha-according to. ind+jina- 
Buddha+vacana-word+anuparodhena-by not going against. 

An abyayibhava compound in instrumental case which serves as an adverb.] 
Yathasankhyam-according to the order of number and sequence. 

i.e. respectively. [Yatha-according to. ind+sankhyarh-number or sequence. 
An abyayibhava compound in accusative case which serves as an adverb.] 
Yathasambhavamc-according to possible applicability. adv. 
[Yatha-according to+ sambhavarh-possibility. The same abyayibhava com- 
pound, cn] 

Yogavibhagena-by splitting part of Sutta. [yoga-Suttatvibhaga, cn. ] 
Va-optionally, not always, as other possible method of the example, ind. 
Vacanam, vacanena, gahanam, gahanena, All refer to a certain 
word or case-termination included in a Sutta or in a Vutti of it. Vacana or 
gahana means a word. n. 
e.g. (a) Sivacanassa, (b) Navacanassa, (c) Smavacanassa, (d) Caggahanena 
All refer to “si” “na” “sma” noun case-endings in a, b and c. 


66 


Frequently found words 
It refers to the nipata particle “ca” in (d). 


(a) adiggahanena, (b) antaggahanena, (c) vibhattiggahanam. 
All refer to the word “adi”, “anta” *vibhatti" etc,. 


67 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


68 


Order of Suttas 


Namo Tassa Bhagavato Arahato Sammasambuddhassa 


Suttakkama (Order of Suttas) 


1. Sandhi 
Sandhi (Euphonic Combination) 


Note: Of the two numbers shown before each Sutta, the first refers to the 
serial sequence of Kaccayana grammar text while the second refers to the 


numerical order applied in the Rüpasiddhi grammar. 


Attho akkharasafifiato. 
Akkhara'padayo ekacattalisam. 
Tattho’danta sara attha. 
Lahumatta tayo rassa. 
Afifie digha. 
Sesa byafijana. 
Vagga paficapaficaso ma’nta. 
0. Am-iti niggahitam. 
]. Parasamanna payoge. 


» » » 


» 


» m 


m 


NO 00 000 0 फन ००७२ ,ट 
-> ->. ० 00 (० -> 2 >) -> 


10, 12. Pubba'madhothita' massaram sarena viyojaye. 


11, 14. Naye param yutte. 


Iti sandhikappe pathamo kando. 


12, 13. Sarà sare lopam. 
13, 15. Va paro asarüpa. 
14, 16. Kvaca'savannam lutte. 


15, 17. Digham. 

16, 18. Pubbo ca. 

17, 19. Ya'me'dantassa'deso. 

18, 20. Va'mo'du'dantanam. 

19, 22. Sabbo car ti. 

20, 27. Do dhassa ca. 

21, 21. Ivanno yam nava. 

22, 28. Eva’dissa ri pubbo ca rasso. 


Iti sandhikappe dutiyo kando. 


69 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


23, 36. 
24, 35. 
25, 37. 
26, 38. 
27, 39. 
28, 40. 
29, 42. 


30, 58. 
31, 49. 
32, 50. 
33, 51. 
34, 52. 
35, 34. 
36, 47. 
37, 57. 
38, 53. 
39, 54. 
40, 55. 
41, 56. 


42, 32. 
43, 33. 
44, 24. 
45, 25. 
46, 26. 
47, 23. 
48, 43. 
49, 44. 
50, 45. 
51, 59. 


Sara pakati byafijane. 

Sare kvaci. 

Dighar. 

Rassam. 

Lopafi'ca tatra'karo. 

Para dvebhavo thane. 

Vagge ghosa’ ghosanarh tatiyapathama. 
Iti sandhikappe tatiyo kando. 


Am byafjane niggahitam. 
Vaggantam và vagge. 
Ehe fiam. 
Sa ye ca. 
Ma, dà sare. 
Ya,va,ma,da,na,ta,ra,la ca’ gama. 
Kvaci o byafijane. 
Niggahitafi'ca. 
Kvaci lopam. 
Byafijane ca. 
Paro và saro. 
Byafijano ca visafifiogo. 

Iti sandhikappe catuttho kando. 


Go sare puthassa' gamo kvaci. 
Passa ca’nto rasso. 
Abbho abhi. 
Ajjho adhi. 
Te na va ivanne. 
Atissa ca’ntassa. 
Kvaci pati patissa. 
Puthassu’ byafyane. 
O avassa. 
Anu'paditthanam vuttayogato. 
Iti sandhikappe paficamo kando. 
Sandhisuttam nitthitam. 


70 


52, 60. 
53, 61. 
54, 62. 
35, 63. 


56, 64. 
57, 71. 
58, 29. 


59, 182. 
60, 177. 


61, 86. 


62, 206. 
63, 217. 
64, 216. 
65, 215. 
66, 205. 
67, 229. 
68, 184. 
69, 186. 


70, 30. 


71, 505. 
72, 185. 
73, 174. 
74, 169. 
75, 170. 
76, 171. 
77, 175. 


78, 31. 
79, 46. 


80, 173. 
81, 172. 
82, 149. 


Order of Suttas 


2. Nama 
(Nouns) 


Jinavacanayuttam hi. 
Lingafi'ca nippajjate. 

Tato ca vibhattiyo. 

Si, yo, am, yo, na, hi, sa, nam, sma, hi, sa, nam, 
smirm, su. 

Ta'danuparodhena. 

Alapane si gasafifio. 
Tvannu’vanna jhala. 

Te itthikhya po. 

A gho. 

Sa’ gamo se. 
Samsasve'kavacanesu ca. 
Eti’masa’mi. 

Tassa va. 

Tato sassa ssaya. 

Gho rassam. 

No ca dva’ dito nammhi. 

A’ma pato smith, sma, nam va. 
Adito 0 ca. 

Jha,lana’miyu’va sare va. 
Ya,va,kara ca. 

Pasafifiassa ca. 

Ga’va se. 

Yosu ca. 

Ava'mmhi ca. 

Avassu'và. 

Tato na'mam patimha’ lutte ca samase. 
O sare ca. 

Tabbiparitt’ papade byafijane ca. 
Gona nammhi va. 

Su,hi,na,su ca. 

Am,mo niggahitam jha,la,pehi. 


71 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


83, 67. 

84, 144. 
85, 150. 
86, 227. 
87, 231. 
88, 147. 
89, 87. 

90, 252. 
91, 194. 
92, 100. 
93, 106. 
94, 105. 
95, 145. 
96, 148. 
97, 156. 
98, 189. 
99, 81. 


100, 214. 


101, 80. 


102, 202. 


103, 79. 
104, 66. 
105,... 


106, 313. 


107, 69. 
108, 90. 


109, 304. 
110, 201. 
111, 179. 
112; 185. 
113, 132. 
114, 178. 
115, 181. 
116, 157. 
117, 124. 


Saralopo’madesapaccaya’dimhi saralope tu pakati. 
Agho rassa’mekavacanayosva’ pi ca. 
Na si,smima'napumsakani. 
Ubha’ dito na’ minnam. 
Inna’minnannam tihi sankhyahi. 
Yosu katanikaralopesu digharh. 
Su,nam,hisu ca. 
Pafica’dina’mattam. 
Patissi’nimhi. 

Ntussa’nto yosu ca. 

Sabbassa va arhsesu. 

Simhi va. 

Aggissi'ni. 

Yosva'katarasso jho. 

Ve, vo, su lo ca. 
Matula'dina'manatta'mikare. 
Sma,hi,smim,nam mhabhimhi va. 
Na ti mehi kata’ karehi. 
Suhisva’karo e. 

Sabbanamanam nammhi ca. 

Ato ne'na. 

So’. 

So va. 

Digho’rehi. 

Sabbayonina’ma-e. 
Sma,smim,nam va. 

Aya catutthe’kavacanassa tu. 
Tayo ne’va ca sabbanamehi. 
Ghato na’ dinath. 

Pato ya. 

Sakhato gasse’ va. 

Ghate’ ca. 

Na amma’ dito. 

Akatarassa lato yva’lapanassa ve,vo. 
Jha,lato sassa no va. 


72 


118, 146. 
119, 155. 


120, 243. 
121, 233. 


122, 99. 


123, 103. 


124, 98. 


125, 198. 
126, 101. 
127, 102. 
128, 104. 
129, 222. 
130, 225. 


131,... 


132, 228. 
133, 230. 
134, 251. 
135, 118. 
136, 119. 
137, 116. 
138, 121. 
139, 245. 
140, 232. 
141, 241. 
142, 242. 
143, 235. 
144, 234. 
145, 238. 
146, 236. 
147, 246. 
148, 247. 
149, 248. 


Order of Suttas 


Gha,pato ca yonam lopo. 
Lato vokaro ca. 


Iti namakappe pathamo kando. 


Amhassa mamam savibhattissa se. 
Mayam yomhi pathame. 
Ntussa’nto. 

Ntassa se va. 

A simhi. 

Am napumsake. 

Avanna ca ge. 

To,ti,ta sa,smim,na,su. 

Nammhi tam va. 
Imassi’da’marhsisu napurhsake. 
Amussa' dum. 
Itthipumanapumsakasankhyam. 
Yosu dvinnarh dve ca. 
Ti,catunnarh tisso,catasso,tayo,cattaro,tini,cattari. 
Pafica’dina’makaro. 

Rajassa rafifo,rajino se. 

Rafüfiam nammhi va. 

Namhi rafifia va. 

Smimmhi rafifie,rajini. 

Tumha’ mhakam tayi,mayi. 
Tva'maham simhi ca. 

Tava,mama se. 
Tuyham,mayhaíi'ca. 
Tam,mama"mmhi. 

Tavam, mamatfi'ca nava. 

Namhi taya,maya. 

Tumhassa tuvam,tva'mamhi. 
Padato dutiya,catutthi,chatthisu vo,no. 
Te,me’kavacanesu ca. 

Na ammhi. 


73 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


150, 249. 
151, 250. 
152, 136. 
153, 138. 


154,... 


155; 137. 
156, 142. 
157, 140. 
151, 143. 
159, 139. 
160, 197. 


161, 244. 
162, 237. 
163, 240. 
164, 200. 
165, 208. 
166, 209. 
167, 210. 
168, 203. 
169, 117. 
170, 220. 
171, 219. 
172, 218. 
173, 223. 
174, 211. 
175, 212. 
176, 213. 
177, 221. 
178, 224. 
179, 204. 
180, 207. 


181, 95. 


Va tatiye ca. 
Bahuvacanesu vo,no. 
Puma'ntassa' simhi. 
A’malapane’kavacane. 
Samase ca vibhasa. 
Yosva’no. 

Ane smimmhi và. 
Hivibhatthimhi ca. 
Susmi’ma va. 

U namhi ca. 

A Kamma’ntassa ca. 


Iti namakappe dutiyo kando. 


Tumha'mhehi na’makath. 

Và yva'ppathamo. 

Sassa'm. 
Sabbanamakarate'pathamo. 
Dvandattha va. 

Na’nfam sabbanamikam. 
Bahubbthimhi ca. 

Sabbato nam sam,sa,nam. 
Rajassa raju su,narh,hisu ca. 
Sabbassi’masse’ va. 

Ani'mi namhi ca. 
Anapumsakassa'yam simhi. 
Amussa mo sam. 

Eta,tesam so. 

Tassa và nattam sabbattha. 
Sa,sma,smim,sam,sasva'ttam. 
Ima-saddassa ca. 

Sabbato ko. 

Gha,pato smim,sa,nam sarh,sa. 
Ne’tahi, smi’maya, ya. 
Manogana' dito smirh,na,na’mi,a. 


74 


182, 97. 
183, 48. 
184, 96. 


185, 112. 
186, 107. 
187, 108. 
188, 115. 
189, 113. 
190, 114. 
191, 130. 
192, 135. 
193, 122. 
194, 131. 
195, 134. 
196, 133. 
197, 125. 
198, 123. 
199, 158. 
200, 159. 
201, 163. 
202, 164. 
203, 162. 
204, 167. 
205, 160. 
206, 165. 
207, 161. 
208, 166. 
209, 168. 
210, 239. 


211, 126. 
212, 129. 
213, 127. 


Order of Suttas 


Sassa co’. 

Etesa'mo lope. 

Sa sare va’ gamo. 

Santasaddassa so bhe bo ca’nte. 

Simhi gacchanta’ dinar nta-saddo am. 

Sesesu ntu’va. 

Brahma’ tta,sakha,raja’ dito 8 manam. 

Sy’a ca. 

Yona’mano. 

Sakhato ca’yo no. 

Smi’me. 

Brahmato gassa ca. 

Sakhantassi’ no,na,narh,sesu. 

Aro himhi va. 

Suna’mamsu va. 

Brahmato tu smimni. 

Uttam sa,nà,su. 

Satthupita' dina" mà sismim silopo ca. 

Affesva'rattam. 

Va nammhi. 

Satthunattafi’ca. 

U sasmim salopo ca. 

Sakkamandhata' dinafi'ca. 

Tato yona'mo tu. 

Tato smi' mi. 

Naa. 

Aro rassa’mikare. 

Pita'dina' masimhi. 

Taya,tayinam takaro tva'ttam va. 
Iti namakappe tatiyo kando. 

Atta’nto hismi' manattam. 

Tato smim ni. 

Sassa no. 


75 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


214, 128. Sma na. 

215,141. Jha,la,to ca. 

216, 180. Ghapato smim yarh va. 

217, 199. Yonam ni napumsakehi. 

218, 196. Ato niccam. 

219,195. Sim. 

220,74.  Sesato lopam gasi’pi. 
221,282. Sabbasa’mavuso’ pasagganipata’ dthi ca. 
222, 342. Pumassa linga’disu samasesu. 
223, 188. Am yam'ito pasafifiato. 

224, 153. Nam jhato katarassa. 

225,151. Yonam no. 

226,154. Smim ni. 

227, 270. Kissa ka ve ca. 

228,272. Ku him,hamsu ca. 

229,226. Sesesu ca. 

230, 262. Tra,to,the-su ca. 

231, 263. Sabbasse’tassa’karo va. 

232, 267. Tre niccam. 

233, 264. E to,the-su ca. 

234, 265. Imassi tham,dani,ha,to,dhe-su ca. 
235,281. A dhunamhi ca. 

236,280. Eta rahimhi. 

237,176. Itthiya’mato apaccayo. 

238, 187. Nada'dito va 1. 

239, 190. nava,nika,neyya,nantuhi. 

240, 193. Pati,bhikkhu, rajr karantehi ini. 
241, 191. Ntussa ta' mikare. 

242, 192. Bhavato bhoto’. 

243,110. Bho ge tu. 


7 After this Sutta, there are two more Suttas found in the Rüpasiddhi text and 
earlier versions of the text. They are 1.Obhavo yosu kvaci vakarassa, 
2.Bhadantassa Bhaddanta, bhante. 


76 


244, 72. 
245,152. 
246,73. 


247, 261. 
248, 260. 
249, 266. 
250, 268. 
251, 269. 
252, 271. 
253, 273. 
254, 274. 
255, 275. 


256,... 


257, 276. 
258, 278. 
259, 279. 
260, 277. 
261, 369. 
262, 391. 
263, 392. 
264, 393. 
265, 394. 
266, 395. 
267, 396. 
268, 397. 


269, 41. 


270, 120. 


Order of Suttas 


Akarapita'dya'ntana' ma. 
Jha,la,pa rassam. 
Akaro va. 


Iti namakappe catuttho kando. 


Tva' dayo vibhattisafifiayo. 
Kvaci to pañcamya’ tthe. 
Tra,tha, sattamiya sabbanamehi. 
Sabbato dhi. 
Kimsma vo. 
Him,ham,hificanam 
Tamha ca. 
Imasma ha,dha ca. 
Yato hith. 
Kale. 
Kirh,sabba’fife’ka,ya,ku,hi da,dacanam. 
Tamha dani ca. 
Imasma rahi,dhuna,dani ca. 
Sabbassa so damhi va. 
Avanno ye lopafi'ca. 
Vuddhassa jo iyi’tthesu. 
Pasatthassa so ca. 
Antikassa nedo. 
Balhassa sadho. 
Appassa kan. 
Yuvanai'ca. 
Vantu,mantu,vi,nafi’ca lopo. 
Yavatam ta,la,na,da,karanam byafijanani 
ca,la,fia,ja,karattarh. 
Amha,tumha’ntu,raja,brahma’tta,sakha,satthu, 
pita'dihi sma na’va. 
Iti namakappe paficamo kando. 
Namasuttam nitthitam. 


77 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


271, 88. 


272, 309. 
273, 310. 
274, 311. 
275, 312. 


276, 302. 


277, 303. 


278, 320. 
279, 292. 
280, 285. 
281, 294. 
282, 295. 
283, 316. 
284, 283. 


285, 70. 


286, 291. 
287, 296. 
288, 293. 
289, 297. 
290, 298. 
291, 299. 
292, 300. 
293, 301. 
294, 305. 


3. Karaka 


(Parts of the Sentence & their Case-endings) 


Yasma’dapeti, bhaya'madatte và ta' dapadanam. 
Dhàtunamàna'mupasaggayoga' disva'pi ca. 
Rakkhana' tthana' micchitam. 

Yena va'dassanam. 
Düra'ntika'ddhakala,nimmana,tvalopa,disa yoga, 
vibhatta rappayoga,suddha'ppamocana,hetu, 
vivitt’ ppamana,pubbayoga,bandhana,gunavacana, 
paüha,kathana,thoka'kattüsu ca. 

Yassa datukamo rocate dharayate và tam 
sampadanam. 
Silagha,hanu,tha,sapa,dhara,piha,kudha, 
duhi'sso'ssüya,radhi' kkha,pacca’ suna,anupatigina, 
pubbakatta’rocanattha,ta’ dattha,tuma’ttha’ lamattha, 
mafina’nadarappa’nini,gatya’ tthakammani asisattha, 
sammuti,bhiyya,sattamya’tthesu ca. 

Yo’dharo ta’mokasath. 

Yena và kayirate tam karanarh. 

Yam karoti tam kammam. 

Yo karoti sa katta. 

Yo kareti sa hetu. 

Yassa và pariggaho tam sami. 

Linga'tthe pathama. 

Alapane ca. 

Karane tatiya. 

Saha’diyoge ca. 

Kattari ca. 

Hetva'tthe ca. 

Sattamya’tthe ca. 

Yen’angavikaro. 

Visesane ca. 

Sampadane catuttht. 

Namoyoga’disva’pi ca. 


78 


295. 307. 
296, 314. 
297, 284. 
298, 287. 
299, 288. 
300, 286. 


301, 315. 
302, 319. 
303, 321. 


304, 322. 
305, 323. 
306, 289. 
307, 290. 
308, 317. 
309, 318. 
310, 324. 
311, 325. 
312, 326. 
313, 327. 
314, 328. 
315, 329. 


Order of Suttas 


Apadane paficami. 

Karana'tthe ca. 

Kamma'tthe dutiya. 

Kala'ddhana' maccantasamyoge. 
Kamma’ppavacantyayutte. 
Gati,buddhi,bhuja,patha,hara,kara,saya’dinarh karite 
va. 

Samismim chatthi. 

Okase sattami. 

Sami’ ssara’ dhipati,dayada,sakkhi,patibhi,pasuta, 
kusalehi ca. 

Niddharane ca. 

Ana’dare ca. 

Kvaci dutiya chatthina' matthe. 
Tatiya,sattaminail'ca. 

Chattht ca. 

Dutiya,paficami nafi'ca. 
Kamma,karana,nimitta’tthesu sattami. 
Sampadane ca. 

Paficamya'tthe ca. 

Kala,bhavesu ca. 
Upa'dhya'dhikissaravacane. 
Manditu'ssukkesu tatiya ca. 

Iti namakappe karakakappo chattho kando. 


Karakasuttam nitthitam. 


79 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


316, 331. 
317, 332. 
318, 333. 
319, 330. 
320, 335. 
321, 349. 
322, 359. 


323, 360. 


324, 339. 
325, 348. 
326, 341. 
327, 351. 
328, 352. 
329, 357. 
330, 340. 
331, 353. 
332, 343. 
333, 344. 
334, 345. 
335, 346. 
336, 347. 
337, 350. 
338, 356. 
339, 358. 
340, 355. 
341, 336. 
342, 337. 
343, 338. 


4. Samasa 
(Compound Nouns) 

Namanarh samaso yutta'ttho. 

Tesam vibhattiyo lopa ca. 

Pakati ca'ssa sara’ ntassa. 
Upasagganipatapubbako abyayibhavo. 
So napurhsakalingo. 

Digusse’kattarh. 

Tatha dvande pani,türiya,yogga,sena'nga, 
khuddajantuka,vividha viruddha,visabhaga’ 
tthadinafi'ca. 

Vibhasa rukkha,tina,pasu,dhana,dhafifia, 
janapada’ dinar ca. 

Dvipade tulya’ dhikarane kammadharayo. 
Sankhyapubbo digu. 

Ubhe tappurisa. 

A’ma’dayo parapadebhi. 
Afifiapada’tthesu bahubbthi. 

Namanam samuccayo dvando. 

Mahatam maha tulya’dhikarane pade. 
Itthiyam bhasitapumi’tthi puma’va ce. 
Kammadharaya saññe ca. 

Attarh nassa tappurise. 

Sare an. 

Kad kussa. 

Ka’ppa’tthesu ca. 

Kvaci samasanta gatana’makaranto. 
Nadimha ca. 

Jayaya tu darh,jani patimhi. 

Dhanumha ca. 

Am vibhattina’makaranta abyayibhava. 
Saro rasso napumsake. 

Afinasma lopo ca. 
Iti namakappe samasakappo sattamo kando. 

Samasasuttham nitthitam. 


80 


244, 361. 
345, 366. 
346, 367. 
347, 368. 
348, 371. 
349, 372. 
350, 373. 
351, 374. 


352, 376. 
353, 378. 
354, 379. 
355, 380. 
356, 381. 
357, 382. 
358, 383. 
359, 384. 
360, 387. 
361, 388. 
362, 389. 
363, 390. 
364, 398. 
365, 399. 
366, 400. 
367, 401. 
368, 402. 
369, 403. 
370, 405. 
371, 404. 
372, 385. 
373, 406. 
374, 408. 


Order of Suttas 


5. Taddhita 
(Nouns in Affixes) 


Va na’ pacce. 

Nayana,nana, vaccha’dito. 
Neyyo kattika’ dihi. 

Ato ni va. 

Navo’pakva’dthi. 

Nera vidhava’ dito. 

Yena va sarhsattharh,tarati,carati,vahati, niko. 
Ta’ madhite, te nakata’ di,sannidhana,niyoga,sippa, 
bhanda,jivika’tthesu ca. 

Na raga, tasse’ da’ manifia’tthesu ca. 
Jata’ dina’ mimi’ ya ca. 
Samüha'tthe kan,na. 
Gama,jana,bandhu,sahaya’ dihi ta. 
Ta’dassa thana' miyo ca. 
Upamattha'yitattam. 
Tan'nissitatthe lo. 

Alu tabbahule. 

Nya,tta,ta bhave tu. 

Na visama’ dihi. 

Ramantya’ dito kan. 

Visese tara,tami’siki’ yi’ ttha. 
Ta’dassa’tthi’ti vi ca. 

Tapa’ dito sī. 

Danda’ dito ika,1. 

Madhva’ dito ro. 

Guna’ dito vantu. 

Satya’ dthi mantu. 

Saddha’dito na. 

Ayussu’kara’sa mantumhi. 
Tappakativacane mayo. 
Sankhyapürane mo. 

Sa chassa va. 


81 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


375, 412. 
376, 257. 


EVE 


378, 414. 
379. 258. 
380, 255. 
381, 254. 
382, 259. 
383, 253. 
384, 407. 
385, 409. 
386, 410. 
387, 411. 


388, 68. 


389, 413. 


390, 256. 


391, 423. 
392, 418. 
303, 415. 


394, 416. 
395, 417. 
396, 363. 
397, 420. 
398, 421. 
399, 422. 
400, 364. 
401, 375. 
402, 377. 
403, 354. 
404, 370. 


Eka'dito 085955". 

Dase so niccafi’ca. 

Ante niggahitafi’ca. 

Ti ca. 

La da,ranam. 

Visati,dasesu bà dvissa tu. 

Eka'dito dassa ra sankhyane. 

Attha'dito ca. 

Dve’ka’tthana’makaro va. 

Catu’cchehi tha,tha. 

Dvi,tthi tiyo. 

Tiye du, ta’pi ca. 

Tesa’maddhtipapadena 
addhuddha,divaddha,diyaddha’ ddhatiya. 
Sarüpana' mekasesva'sakim. 

Ganane dasassa dvi,ti,catu,pafica,cha,satta,attha, 
navakanam Vi,ti,cattara,pafina,cha,satta’sa,nava yosu 
yonafi'cr' sa? masam,thi,ritr'tu'ti. 

Catü'papadassa lopo tu'ttarapada'dicassa cu,co'pi 
nava. 

Ya’danu’papanna nipatana sijjhanti. 

Dva'dito ko'nekatthe ca. 

Dasa dasakam satah dasakanam satam sahassafi’ca 
yomhi. 

Yava ta'duttari dasagunitani’ca. 

Sakanamehi. 

Tesam no lopam. 

Vibhage dha ca. 

Sabbanamehi pakaravacane tu tha. 

Ki mimehi thar. 

Vuddha’disarassa va'samyogantassa sane ca. 

Ma 'yüna' magamo thane. 

Attafi'ca. 

Kvaca' dimajjhu'ttaranam digha,rassa, paccayesu ca. 
Tesu vuddhi,lopa’ gama, vikara, viparita’ desà ca. 


82 


405, 365. 


406, 429. 
407, 439. 
408, 431. 
409, 441. 
410, 432. 
411, 436. 
412, 437. 
413, 427. 
414, 428. 
415, 451. 
416, 454. 
417, 460. 
418, 456. 
419, 469. 
420, 471. 
421, 473. 
422, 475. 
423, 426. 


424, 450. 
425, 453. 
426, 459. 


427, 455. 


Order of Suttas 


A’yuvannanan’ca’yo vuddhi. 


Iti namakappe taddhitakappo atthamo kando. 


Taddhitasuttam nitthitam. 


6. Akhyata 
(Verbs) 


Atha pubbani-vibhattinam cha parassapadani. 
Parany'attanopadani. 

Dve dve pathama, majjhimu'ttamapurisa. 

Sabbesa' meka'bhidhane paro puriso 

Namamhi payujjamane’pi tulya' dhikarane pathamo. 
Tumhe majjhimo. 

Amhe uttamo. 

Kale. 

Vattamana pacc'uppanne. 

Anatya'sitthe'nuttakale paficami. 

Anumati, parikappa tthesu sattami. 

Apaccakkhe parokkha’ tite. 

Hiyyopabhuti’ paccakkhe hiyyattani. 

Samipe jjatani. 

Mayoge sabbakale ca. 

Ana’ gate bhavissanti. 

Kiriya’tipanne’ tite kalatipatti. 

Vattamana ti-anti, si-tha, mi-ma, te-ante, se-vhe, 
e-mhe. 

Paficami tu-antu, hi-tha, mi-ma, tam-antam, ssu-vho, 
e-amase. 

Sattami eyya-eyyum, eyyasi-eyyatha, eyyami- 
eyyama, etha-eram, etho-eyyavho, eyyam-eyyamhe. 
Parokkha a-u, e-ttha, am-mha, ttha-re, ttho-vho, 
im-mhe. 

Hiyyattani 4-0, o-ttha, am-mha, ttha-tthum, 
se-vham, im-mhase. 


83 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


428, 468. Ajjatani i-um o-ttha, irh-mha, 4-0, se-vham, 
am-mhe. 

429,472. Bhavissanti ssati-ssanti, ssasi-ssatha, ssami-ssama, 
ssate-ssante, ssase-ssavhe, ssam-ssamhe. 

430,474. Kalatipatti ssa-ssarhsu, sse-ssatha, ssam-ssamha, 
ssatha-ssimsu?, ssase-ssavhe, ssam-ssamhase. 

431,458. Hiyyattani, sattam1, paficami, vattamana 
sabbadhatukam. 

Iti akhyatakappe pathamo kando 


432, 362. Dhatulingehi para paccaya. 

433,528. Tija,gupa,kita,manehi kha,cha,sa va. 

434, 534. Bhuja,ghasa,hara,su,pa’ dihi tu’miccha’tthesu. 
435, 536. Aya namato kattü'pamana' dacare. 

436, 537. lyü'pamana ca. 

437, 538. Namamha'tticcha' tthe. 

438, 540. Dhatühi ne,naya,nape,napaya karitani hetva’ tthe. 
439, 539. Dhàturüpe namasma nayo ca. 

440, 445. Bhavakammesu yo. 

441, 447. Tassa cavagga,yakara,vakarattam sadhatvantassa. 
442, 448. Ivanna'gamo va. 

443, 449. Pubbarüpafi'ca. 

444, 511. Tatha kattari ca. 

445, 433. Bhuva' dito a. 

446, 509. Rudha'dito niggahitapubbaii’ca. 

447, 510. Diva'dito yo. 

448, 512. Sva'dito nuna una ca. 

449, 513. Kiya'dito na. 

450, 517. Gaha'dito ppa,nha. 

451, 520. Tana’dito o,yira. 

452, 525. Cura'dito ne,naya. 


* [n the earlier versions, it is found "ssimsu-fedq " which is more relevant in 
the light of practical usage in the canonical texts. 


84 


453, 444. 
454, 440. 
455, 530. 
456, 430 
457, 424. 


458, 461. 
459, 462. 
460, 506. 
461, 464. 
462, 467. 
463, 532. 
464, 504. 
465, 463. 
466, 489. 
467, 533. 
468, 492. 
469, 494. 
470, 514. 
471, 483. 
472, 531. 
473, 529. 
474, 535. 
475, 465. 
476, 442. 
477, 479. 
478, 438. 
479, 452. 
480, 490. 
481, 524. 


482, 508. 
483, 527. 


Order of Suttas 


Attanopadani bhave ca kammani. 
Kattari ca. 
Dhatupaccayehi vibhattiyo. 
Kattari parassapadam. 
Bhüva'dayo dhatavo. 
Iti akhyatakappe dutiyo kando. 


Kvaca'divannana' mekassaranam dvebhavo. 
Pubbo'bbhaso. 
Rasso. 
Dutiya,catutthanam pathama,tatiya. 
Kavaggassa cavaggo. 
Mana,kitanam va,tattam va. 
Hassa jo. 
Antassi' vanna'karo va. 
Niggahitafi'ca. 
Tato pa,mananam va,mam sesu. 
Thà tittho. 
Pà pivo. 
Nassa ja,jarn,na. 
Disassa passa,dissa,dakkha va. 
Byafijana'ntassa co chapaccayesu ca. 
Ko khe ca. 
Harassa gi se. 
Brü,bhüna' maha,bhiiva parokkhayath. 
Gamissa’nto ccho va sabbasu. 
Vacassa'jjatanimhi' makaro o. 
Akaro digham hi,mi,mesu. 
Hi lopam va. 
Hotissare'ho' he bhavissantimhi ssassa ca. 
Karassa sapaccayassa kaho. 

Iti akhyatakappe tatiyo kando. 


Da'dantassam' mi,mesu. 
Asamyoga'ntassa vuddhi karite. 


85 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


484, 542. Ghata’dinam va. 

485, 434. Afifiesu ca. 

486, 543. Guha,dusanam dīgham. 

487, 478. Vaca,vasa,vaha'dina' mukaro vassa ye. 

488, 481. Ha vipariyayo lo va. 

489, 519. Gahassa ghe ppe. 

490, 518. Halopo nhamhi. 

491,523. Karassa kasatta' majjatanimhi. 

492, 499. Asasmà mi,manam mhi,mha’ntalopo ca. 

493, 498. Thassa tthattam. 

494, 495. Tissa tthittam. 

495, 500. Tussa tthuttam. 

496, 497. Simhi ca. 

497, 477. Labhasma 1,irhnarh ttha,ttham. 

498,480. Kusasma 'di cchi. 

499, 507. Da-dhatussa dajjam. 

500, 486. Vadassa vajjam. 

501, 443. Gamissa ghammarh. 

502, 493. Yamhi da,dha,ma,tha,ha,pa,maha,matha’ dina" mi. 

503, 485. Yajassa’dissi’. 

504, 470. Sabbato um imsu. 

505, 482. Jara,maranam jira,jiyya,miyya va. 

506, 496. Sabbattha'sassa'dilopo ca. 

507, 501. Asabbadhatuke Bhü. 

508, 515. Eyassa fiato iya,fia. 

509, 516. Nassa lopo ya-karattam. 

510, 487. Lopafi’ce’tta’makaro. 

511, 521. Utta'mokaro. 

512, 522. Karassa’karo ca. 

513,435. Oava sare. 

514,491. E aya. 

515,541. Te ava’ya karite. 

516, 466. Ikara’ gamo asabbadhatukamhi. 

517, 488. Kvaci dhatuvibhattipaccayanam 
digha,viparita’desa,lopa’ gama ca. 


86 


518, 446. 
519, 457. 
520, 502. 
521, 425. 
522, 476. 
523, 526. 


524, 561. 
525, 565. 
526, 567. 
527, 568. 
528, 577. 
529, 580. 
530, 584. 
531, 589. 
532, 590. 
533, 59]. 
534, 592. 
535, 593. 
536, 594. 
537, 566. 
538, 595. 
539, 558. 
540, 545. 
541, 552. 
542, 557. 
543, 555. 
544, 556. 


Order of Suttas 


Attanopadani parassapadattam. 
A-kara’ gamo hiyyattant,ajjatani,kalatipattisu. 
Brito 1 timhi. 
Dhatussa’nto lopo'nekasarassa. 
Isu,yamüna' manto ccho va. 
Karitanam no lopam. 
Iti akhyatakappe catuttho kando. 


Akhyata-suttarh nitthitarn. 


7. Kibbidhana 
(Verbal Nouns & Nouns in Kita Affixes) 


Dhatuya kamma'dimhi no. 
Safifiaya'ma,nu. 

Pure dada ca im. 

Sabbato nvu,tva'vi va. 
Visa,ruja,pada' dito na. 
Bhave ca. 

Kvi ca. 

Dhara’dihi rammo. 
Tassila'disu ni,tva’ vi ca. 
Sadda,kudha,cala,manda’ttha,ruca’ dihi yu. 
Para’ digamimha ru. 

Bhikkha’ dito ca. 

Hanatya’ dinam nuko. 

Nu niggahitarh pada’nte. 
Samhana'fífiaya và ro gho. 
Ramhi ra’nto ra'di no. 
Bhava,kammesu tabba’ntya. 
Nyo ca. 

Karamha ricca. 

Bhüto'bba. 
Vada,mada,gamu,yuja,garaha’karadthi 
jja,mma,gga,yhe’yya garo va. 


87 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


545, 548. 
546, 562. 
547, 596. 
548, 597. 
549, 550. 


550, 546. 
551, 598. 
552, 609. 
553, 599. 
554, 601. 
555, 612. 
556, 622. 
557, 606. 
558, 602. 
559, 603. 
560, 604. 
561, 636. 
562, 638. 
563, 639. 
564, 640. 
565, 646. 
566, 574. 
567, 575. 
568, 576. 
569, 610. 
570, 611. 


571, 624. 
572, 625. 
573, 626. 
574, 613. 
575, 614. 


Te kicca. 
Afiüe kit. 
Nanda'dihi yu. 
Kattu,karana,padesesu ca. 
Ra,ha'dito na. 
Iti kibbidhanakappe pathamo kando. 


Na’dayo tekalika. 
Safifiayam dadhato i. 
T1 kit ca'sitthe. 
Itthiya’ matiyavo va. 
Karato ririya. 
Atte ta,tavantu,tavi. 
Bhava,kammesu ta. 
Budha,gama’ditthe kattari. 
Jito ina sabbattha. 
Supato ca. 
Isarh,du,sthi kha. 
Iccha’tthesu samanakattukesu tave,tum va. 
Araha,sakka’ disu ca. 
Pattavacane ala’matthesu ca. 
Pubbakale'kakattukanam tuna,tvana,tva va. 
Vattamane mana’nta. 
Sasa’ dthi ratthu. 
Pa’ti’to ritu. 
Mana’ dthi ratu. 
Agama tuko. 
Bhabbe ika. 
Iti kibbidhanakappe dutiyo kando. 


Paccaya' danitthà nipatana sijjhanti. 
Sasa,disato tassa rittho ca. 

Sa'di santa,puccha,bhanja,hansa' dihi ttho. 
Vasato uttha (vasato uttha). 

Vassa và vu. 


88 


576, 607. 
577, 628. 
5778, 560. 
579, 629. 
580, 630. 
581, 616. 
582, 631. 
583, 617. 
584, 618. 
585, 619. 
586, 600. 
587, 632. 
588, 620. 
589, 621. 


590, 579. 
591, 544. 
592, 503. 
593, 564. 
594, 582. 


595, 637. 
596, 551. 
597, 641. 
598, 643. 
599, 644. 
600, 645. 
601, 334. 


602, 6. 
603, 7. 


604, 684. 
605, 547. 
606, 642. 


Order of Suttas 


Dha,dha,bha,hehi dha,dha ca. 

Bhanjato ggo ca. 

Bhuja’dina’manto no dvi ca. 

Vaca va vu’. 

Gupa’ dinafi’ca. 

Tara’ dthi inno. 

Bhida’ dito inna,anna,ina va. 

Susa,paca,sakato kkha,kka ca. 

Pakkama’ dthi nto ca. 

Jana’ dina’ ma timhi ca. 

Gama,khana,hana,rama' dina’manto. 

Rakaro ca. 

Tha,pàna' mi- ca. 

Ha'ntehi ho hassa lo và adaha,nahanath. 
Iti kibbidhanakappe tatiyo kando. 


Namhi ranjassa jo bhava,karanesu. 
Hanassa ghato. 
Vadho và sabbattha. 
Akarantana’ mayo. 
Pura,sa' mupaparihi karotissa kha,khara va 
tapaccayesu Ca. 
Tave,tuna’disu ka. 
Gama,khana,hana' dinar tum,tabba' disu na. 
Sabbehi tuna'dinam yo. 
Ca,na'ntehi raccam. 
Disa svana,sva’ntalopo ca. 
Ma,ha,da,bhehi mma,yha,jja,bbha,ddha ca. 
Taddhita,samasa,kitaka namarh’va’tave,tuna’disu ca. 
Dumhi garu. 
Digho ca. 
Akkharehi kara. 
Yatha'gama'mikaro. 
Da,dha’ntato yo kvaci. 
Iti kibbidhanakappe catuttho kando. 


89 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


607, 578. 
608, 623. 
609, 484. 
610, 627. 
611, 608. 
612, 615. 
613, 583. 
614, 581. 
615, 586. 
616, 587. 
617, 633. 
618, 571. 
619, 573. 
620, 549. 
621, 553. 
622, 570. 
623, 554. 


624, 563. 
625, 605. 
626, 634. 
627, 652. 
628, 653. 
629, 569. 
630, 654. 
631, 655. 
632, 656. 
633, 657. 


Niggahita samyoga' di no. 
Sabbattha ge gi. 

Sadassa sidattam. 

Yajassa sarassi’tthe. 
Ha,catutthana’mantanarh do dhe. 
Do dhakare. 

Gahassa ghara ne va. 

Dahassa do lam. 

Dhatva’ntassa lopo kvimhi. 
Vida’nte U. 
Na,ma,ka,rana’mantanam ni’ yuttatamhi. 
Na ka, gattarh ca,ja nvumhi. 
Karassa ca tattam tusmim. 
Turh,tuna,tabbesu va. 

Karitam viya nà'nubandho. 
Ana’ka yu,nvünam. 

Ka,ga ca,janarh. 


Iti kibbidhanakappe paficamo kando. 
Kibbidhanasuttam nitthitam. 


8. Unadikappa 
(Nouns in Unadi-Affixes) 


Kattari kit. 

Bhava,kammesu kicca,kta,kha’ttha. 
Kammani dutiyayam kto. 
Khya'dihi man ma ca to va. 

Sama’ dthi tha,ma. 

Gahassw’ padhasse’ va. 

Masussa sussa, cchara,cchera. 
Apubbacarassa ca. 

Ala,kala,salehi la,ya. 

Yana,lana. 


90 


634, 658. 
635, 559. 
636, 659. 


637,... 


638, 668. 
639, 585. 


640,... 


641, 572. 
642, 588. 


643, 635. 
644, 661. 


645, 662. 
646, 419. 
647, 663. 
648, 664. 
649, 665. 
650, 651. 
651, 647. 
652, 648. 
653, 306. 
654, 649. 
655, 650. 
656, 666. 
657, 667. 
658, 668. 
659, 669. 
660, 670. 
661, 671. 
662, 672. 
663, 673. 
664, 674. 
665, 675. 


Order of Suttas 


Mathissa thassa lo ca. 

Pesa'tisagga,pattakalesu kicca. 

Avassaka’ dhaminesu ni ca. 

Araha,sakka' dihi turn. 

Vaja'dihi pabbajja’dayo nippajjante. 

Kvi lopo ca. 

Saca,janarh ka,ga na'nubandhe. 

Nuda'dihi yu nviina’mana’nana’ka’nanaka sakaritehi 
ca. 

Lya,ta,ma,kim,esana' mantassaro digham kvaci 
disassa gunam do ram sa,kkh?’ca. 

Bhya'dihi mati;budhi,püjadr'hi ca kto. 
Vepu,si,dava,vamu,ku,da,bhü,hva' dihi 
thu,ttima,nima nibbatte. 

Akkose na' mha"ni. 

Eka' dito sakissa kkhatturh. 
Sunassu'nasso'na,vanu,vanu'nu' nakhu'na'na. 
Tarunassa susu ca. 

Yuvassu'vassu'vu' vanu'nü'nà. 

Kale vattamana'tite nva’dayo. 

Bhavissati gama’ dthi n1,ghin. 

Kiriyayarh nvu,tavo. 

Bhava vacimhi catutthr. 

Kammani no. 

Sese ssath,ntu,mana’na. 

Chada’ dihi ta,tran. 

Vada’ dihi nitto gane. 

Mida’ dthi tti,tiyo. 

Usu,ranja,damsanam, damsassa daddho dha,tha ca. 
Sü,vu'sana' mii’ vusana’mato tho ca. 

Ranju' da’dthi dha,di’dda,ki’ra kvaci ja,da,lopo ca. 
Patito hissa heran,hiran. 

Kadhya'dihi ko. 

Khàda'ma,gamanam khandha’ndha,gandha. 
Pata’ dthya’ larh. 


91 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


666, 676. 
667, 677. 
668, 678. 
669, 679. 
670, 680. 
671, 681. 
672, 682. 
673, 683. 


Puthassa puthu,patha’mo va. 
Sasva’dihi tu,davo. 

Ca’ya’dthi Ivaro. 

Muna’ dthi ci’. 

Vida’ dihyt’ ro. 

Hana’ dihi nu,nu,tavo. 

Kuta’ dthi tho. 
Manu,pura,suna’dthi ussa,nusi’sa. 


Iti kibbidhanakappe unadikappo chattho kando. 


Unadisuttam nitthitam. 


92 


सुत्तक्कम 


१. सन्धि 


. अत्थो अक्खरसञ्ञातो 

. अक्खरापादयो एकचत्तालीसं 
तत्थोदन्ता सरा AZ 

. लहुमत्ता तयो रस्सा 

. अञ्जे दीघा 

. सेसा व्यञ्जना 

. वग्गा पञ्चपञ्चसो मन्ता 

८, १०.अंइति Matted 

९, ११ .परसमञ्ञा पयोगे 

१०, १२. पुव्वमधोठितमस्सरं सरेन वियोजये 

११, १४. नये परं युत्ते 

इति सन्धिकप्पे पठमो कण्डो 


H 


GM .C > AJ A o 
PN £ > A0 20 “७ 


१२, १३. सरा सरे लोपं 

१३, १५. वा परो असरूपा 

१४, १६. क्वचासवण्णं od 

१५, १७. दीघं 

१६, १८. Jal च 

१७, १९. य मेदन्तस्सादेसो 

१८, २०. व मोदुदन्तानं 

१९.२२. सब्बो चं ति 

२०, २७. दो धस्स च 

२१, २१. इवण्णो यं नवा 

33, २८. एवादिस्स रि Yat च रस्सो 
इति सन्धिकप्पे दुतियो कण्डो 


२३, ३६. सरा पकति व्यञ्जने 
२४, ३५. सरे क्वचि 
२५, ३७. दीघं 


93 


Order of Suttas 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


२६, ३८. रस्सं 

२७, ३९. लोपञ्च तत्राकारी 

२८, ४०. पर द्वेभावो ठाने 

२९, ४२. वग्गे घोसाघोसानं ततियपठमा 
इति सन्धिकप्पे ततियो कण्डो 


३०, ५८. अं व्यञ्जने निग्गहितं 

३१. ४९. वग्गन्तं वा वग्गे 

३२, ५०. एहे ञं 

३३.५१.सयेच 

३४, ५२. मदा सरे 

३५, ३४. यवमदनतरला चागमा 

३६, ४७. क्वचि ओ व्यञ्जने 

३७, ५७. निग्गहितञ्च 

३८, ५३. क्वचि लोपं 

३९, ५४. व्यञ्जने च 

४०, ५५. परो वा सरो 

४१, ५६. व्यञ्जनो च विसञ्ञोगो 
इति सन्धिकप्पे चतुत्थो कण्डो 





४२, ३२. गो सरे पुथस्सागमो क्वचि 
४३, ३३. पास्स चन्तो रस्सो 

, २४ अब्भो अभि 

४५, २५. अज्झो अधि 

४६, २६. ते न वा इवण्णे 

४७, २३. अतिस्स चन्तस्स 

४८, ४३. क्वचि dte पतिस्स 

४९, ४४. पुथस्सु व्यञ्जने 

५०, ४५. ओ अवस्स 

५१, ५९. अनुपदिद्ठानं वुत्तयोगतो 


इति सन्धिकप्पे पञ्चमो कण्डो 
सन्धिसुत्तं fif । 





94 


५७, 


Order of Suttas 


२. नाम 


६०. जिनवचनयुत्तं हि 
६१. लिङ्गञ्च निप्पज्जते 
६२. ततो च विभत्तियो 
६३. सियो, अं यो, ना हि, स नं, स्मा हि, स नं, स्मि सु 
६४. तदनुपरोधेन 

७१. आलपने सि गसञ्ञो 
२९. इवण्णुवण्णा झला 
१८२. ते इत्थिख्या पो 
१७७. आघो 

८६. सागमो से 

२०६. संसास्वेकवचनेसु च 
२१७. एतिमास मि 

२१६. तस्सा वा 

२१५. ततो सस्स स्साय 
२०५. घो रस्सं 

२२९. नो च द्वादितो नंम्हि 
१८४. अमा पतो स्मिस्मानं वा 
१८६. आदितो ओ च 

३०. झलान मियुवा सरे वा 
५०५. यवकारा च 

१८५. पसञ्ञस्स च 








१७०. अवम्हि च 
१७१. आवस्सु वा 





, १७५, ततो नमं पतिम्हालुत्ते च समासे 


३१. ओसरेच 

४६. तब्बिपरीतूपपदे व्यञ्जने च 

१७३. गोण नंम्हि वा 

१७२. सुहिनासु च 

१४९. अंमो निग्गहितं झलपेहि 

६७. सरलोपो मादेसपच्चयादिम्हि सरलोपे तु पकति 








95 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


८४, १४४. अघो रस्समेकवचनयोस्वपि च 
८५, १५०. न सिस्मि मनपुंसकानि 
८६, २२७. उभादितो नमिन्न 

८७, २३१. इण्णमिण्णन्नं तीहि use 
८८, १४७. योसु कतनिकारलोपेसु दीघं 
८९, ८७. सुनंहिसु च 

९०, २५२. पञ्चादीन "d 

९१, १९४. पतिस्सिनीम्हि 

९२, १००. न्तुस्सन्तो योसु च 

९३, १०६. सब्बस्स वा अंसेसु 

९४, १०५. सिम्हि वा 

९५, १४५. अग्गिस्सिनि 

९६, १४८. योस्वकतरस्सो झो 

९७, १५६. वैवोसु लो च 

९८, १८९. मातुलादीन मानत्त मीकारे 
९९, ८१. स्माहिस्मिनं म्हाभिम्हि वा 
१००, २१४. न तिमेहि कताकारेहि 
१०१, ८०. सुहिस्वकारी ए 

१०२, २०२. सव्बनामानं नंम्हि च 
१०३, ७९. अतो नेन 

१०४, ६६. सो 

१०५, ०. सोवा 

१०६, ३१३. दीघोरेहि 

१०७, ६९. सब्बयोनीन माए 

१०८, ९०. स्मास्मिनं वा 

१०९, ३०४. आय चतुत्येकवचनस्स तु 
११०, २०१. तयो नेव च सब्बनामेहि 
१११, १७९. घतो नादीनं 

११२, १८३. पतो या 

११३, १३२. सखतो गस्से वा 

११४, १७८. घते च 

११५, १८१. न अम्मादितो 

११६, १५७. अकतरस्सा लतो य्वालपनस्स qai 
११७, १२४. झलतो सस्स नो वा 








96 


१४६. 
१५५. 
इति 


२४३. 
२३३. 
LS 
१०३. 
SC. 
SC. 
१०१. 
१०२. 
१०४. 
NS 
SUME 
०. 
२२८. 
२३०. 
२५१. 
११८. 
dam 
११६. 
१२१. 
२४५. 
२३२. 
२४१. 
२४२. 
२३५. 
२३४. 
२३८. 
२३६. 
२४६. 
२४७. 
२४८. 


Order of Suttas 


घपतो च योनं लोपो 
ad वोकारी च 
नामकप्पे पठमो कण्डो 


अम्हस्स ममं सविभत्तिस्स से 
मयं योम्हि पठमे 

न्तुस्स न्तो 

न्तस्स से वा 

आ सिम्हि 

अं नपुंसके 

अवण्णा च गे 

तोतिता सस्मिनासु 

नंम्हि तं वा 

इमस्सिद मंसिसु नपुंसके 
अमुस्सादुं 
इत्थिपुमनपुंसकसङ्घ्यं 

ag tet द्वे च 

तिचतुन्नं तिस्सो चतस्सो, तयो चत्तारी, तीणि चत्तारि 
पञ्चादीन मकारी 

राजस्स रञ्ञोराजिनो से 
wat नंम्हि वा 

नाम्हि रञ्ञा वा 

स्मिम्हि रञ्जेराजिनि 
तुम्हम्हाकं तयिमयि 

त्वमहं सिम्हि च 

तवमम से 

TS मय्हञ्च 

que 

तवंममञ्च नवा 

नाम्हि तया मया 

तुम्हस्स तुवंत्वमम्हि 

पदतो दुतियाचतुत्थीछट्टीसु वोनो 
तेमेकवचनेसु च 

न अंम्हि 








97 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


१५०, २४९. वा ततिये च 
१५१, २५०. बहुवचनेसु वो नो 
१५२, १३६. पुमन्तस्सा सिम्हि 
१५३, १३८. अमालपनेकवचने 
१५४, ०. समासे च विभासा 
१५५, १३७. योस्वानो 
१५६, १४२. आने स्मिम्हि वा 
१५७, १४०. हिविभत्तिम्हि च 
१५१, १४३. सुस्मि मा वा 
१५९, १३९. उ नाम्हि च 
१६०, १९७. अ कम्मन्तस्स च 
इति नामकण्पे दुतियो कण्डो 


१६१, २४४. तुम्हम्हेहि नमाकं 
१६२, २३७. वा य्वप्पठमो 

१६३, २४०. सस्सं 

१६४, २००. सब्बनामकारते पठमो 
१६५, २०८. FST वा 

१६६, २०९. नाञ्ञं सव्बनामिकं 
१६७, २१०. बहुव्वीहिम्हि च 

१६८, २०३. सब्बतो नं संसानं 
१६९, ११७. राजस्स राजु सुनंहिसु च 
१७०, २२०. सब्बस्सिमस्से वा 
१७१, २१९. अनिमि नाम्हि च 
१७७२, २१८. अनपुंसकस्सा यं सिम्हि 
१७३, २२३. अमुस्स मो सं 

१७४, २११. एततेसं सो 

१७५, २१२. तस्स वा नत्तं सब्बत्थ 
१७६, २१३. सस्मास्मिसंसास्वत्तं 
१७७, २२१. SHHEGT च 

१७८, २२४. AA को 

१७९, २०४. घपतो स्मिसानं संसा 
१८०, २०७. नेताहि स्मि मायया 
१८१, ९५. मनोगणादितो स्मिनान मिआ 





98 


९७३. 

$c. 

९६. 

१२२: 
१०७१. 
१०८. 
SE 
१९३. 
११४. 
१३०. 
१३५. 
१२२. 
१३१. 
१३४. 
१३३. 
१२५. 
१२३. 
१०५८. 
१५९. 
१६३. 
१६४. 
१६२. 
१६७. 
१६०. 
१६५. 
१६१. 
१६६. 
१६८. 
२३१९. 


सस्स चो 

एतेस मो लोपे 

स सरे वागमो 

सन्तसहस्स सो भे बो चन्ते 
सिम्हि गच्छन्तादीनं न्तसहो अं 
सेसेसु न्तुव 
ब्रह्म्तसखराजादितो अ मानं 
स्या च 

योन मानो 

सखतो चायो नो 

स्मि मे 

ब्रह्मतो गस्स च 

सखन्तस्सि नोनानंसैसु 

आरो हिम्हि वा 

सुनमंसु वा 

ब्रह्मतो तु स्मि नि 

od सनासु 

सत्थुपितादीन मा सिस्मि सिलोपो च 
अञ्जेस्वारत्तं 

वा नंम्हि 

सत्थुनत्तञ्च 

उ सस्मि सलोपो च 
सक्कमन्धातादीनञ्च 

ततो योन मो तु 

ततो स्मि मि 

ना आ 

आरो रस्स मिकारे 

पितादीन मसिम्हि 

तयातयीनं तकारी त्वत्तं वा 
इति नामकप्पे ततियो कण्डो 





99 


Order of Suttas 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


२११, १२६. अत्तन्तो हिस्मि मनत्तं 
२१२, १२९. ततो स्मि नि 

२१३, १२७. सस्स नो 

२१४, १२८. स्मा ना 

२१५, १४१. झलतो च 

२१६, १८०. घपतो स्मि यं वा 

२१७, १९९. योनं नि नपुंसकेहि 
२१८, १९६. अतो निच्चं 

२१९, १९५. सिं 

२२०, ७४. सेसतो लोपं गसिपि 
२२१, २८२. सब्बास मावुसोपसग्गनिपातादीहि च 
२२२, ३४३. पुमस्स लिङ्गादीसु समासैसु 
२२३, १८८. अं य मीतो पसञ्ञतो 
२२४, १५३. नं झतो कतरस्सा 
२२५, १५१. योनं नो 

२२६, १५४. स्मि नि 

२२७, २७०. किस्स क वे च 

२२८, २७२. कु Beg च 

२२९, २२६. सेसेसु च 

330, २६२. त्रतोथेसु च 

२३१, २६३. सव्वस्सेतस्साकारो वा 
२३२, २६७. त्रे निच्चं 

२३३, २६४. ए AA च 

२३४, २६५. इमस्सि थंदानिहतोधेसु च 
२३५, २८१. अ धुनाम्हि च 

२३६, २८०. एत रहिम्हि 

२३७, १७६. इत्थिय मतो आपच्चयो 
२३८, १८७. नदादितो वा ई 

२३९, १९०. णवणिकणेय्यणन्तुहि 
२४०, १९३. पतिभिक्खुराजीकारन्तेहि इनी 
२४१, १९१. न्तुस्स त मीकारे 

२४२, १९२. भवतो भोतो 

२४३, ११०. भो गे तु 

२४४, ७२. अकारपिताद्यन्तान मा 


100 


TUR: 
93. 


झलपा रस्सं 
आकारो वा 
इति नामकप्पे चतुत्थो कण्डो 





. त्वादयो विभत्तिसञ्ञायो 

. क्वचि तो पञ्चम्यत्थे 

. त्रथ सत्तमिया सब्बनामेहि 
. सब्बतो धि 

. किस्मा वो 

. हिंहंहिञ्चनं 

. तम्हा च 

. इमस्मा EST च 

. यतो हिं 


काले 





. किसब्बञ्ञेकयकुहि दादाचनं 
. तम्हा दानि च 

. इमस्मा रहिधुनादानि च 
. सब्बस्स सो दाम्हि वा 

. अवण्णो ये लोपञ्च 

. वुड्डस्स जो इयिट्ठेसु 

. पसत्थस्स सो च 

. अन्तिकस्स नेदो 

. वाळहस्स साधो 

. अप्पस्स कण्‌ 

. युवानञ्च 

. वन्तुमन्तुवीनञ्च लोपो 





. "dd तलणदकारानं व्यञ्जनानि चलञजकारत्तं 
अम्हतुम्हन्तुराजब्रह्मत्तसखसत्थुपितादीहि स्मा नाव 


इति नामकप्पे पञ्चमो कण्डो। 
नामसुत्तं निट्टितँ। 


101 


Order of Suttas 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


3. कारक 





२७१, ३०८. यस्मा दपेति भयमादत्ते वा त दपादानं 

२७२, ३०९. धातुनामान मुपसग्गयोगादीस्वपि च 

२७३, ३१०. रक्खणत्थान मिच्छितं 

२७४, ३१९. येन वा दस्सनं 

२७५, ३१२ .दूरन्तिकद्धकाल निम्मान त्वालोप दिसायोग विभत्तारप्पयोग 
सुद्धप्पमोचन हेतु विवित्तप्पमाण पुब्बयोग बन्धन गुणवचन पञ्ह 
कथन थोकाक्तूसु च 

२७६, ३०२. यस्स दातुकामो trad धारयते वा d सम्पदानं 

२७७, ३०३. सिलाघ हनु ठा सप धार पिह कुधदुहिस्सोस्सूय राधिक्खपच्चासुण 
अनुपतिगिण पुब्बकत्तारोचनत्थ तदत्थ तुमत्थालमत्थ मञ्ञा 
नादरप्पाणिनि गत्यत्थकम्मनि आसीसत्थसम्मुति भिय्य 
सत्तम्यत्थेसु च 

२७८, ३२०. योधारो त मोकासं 

२७९, २९२. येन वा कयिरते तं करणं 

२८०, २८५, यं करोति तं कम्मं 

२८१, २९४. यो करोति स कत्ता 

२८२, २९५. यो कारेति स हेतु 

२८३, ३१६. यस्स वा परिग्गहो तं सामी 

२८४, २८३. लिङ्गत्थे पठमा 

२८५, ७०. आलपने च 

२८६, २९१. करणे ततिया 

२८७, २९६, सहादियोगे च 

२८८, २९३. कत्तरि च 

२८९, २९७. हेत्वत्थे च 

२९०, २९८. सत्तम्यत्थै च 

२९१, २९९. येनङ्गविकारो 

२९२, ३००. विसैसने च 

२९३, ३०१. सम्पदाने चतुत्थी 

२९४, ३०५. नमोयोगादीस्वपि च 

२९५, ३०७. अपादाने पञ्चमी 

२९६, ३१४. PRÀ च 

२९७, २८४. कम्मत्यै दुतिया 

















102 


Order of Suttas 


२९८. २८७. कालद्धान मच्चन्तसंयोगे 

२९९, २८८. कम्मप्पवचनीययुत्ते 

३००, २८६. गतिबुद्धिभुजपठहरकरसयादीनं कारिते वा 
३०१, ३१५. सामिस्मि छट्टी 

३०२, ३१९. ओकासे सत्तमी 

३०३, ३२१. सामिस्सराधिपतिदायादसक्खिपतिभूपसुतकुसलेहि च 
३०४, ३२२. निद्धारणे च 

३०५, ३२३. अनादरे च 

३०६, २८९. क्वचि दुतिया छट्टीन मत्यै 

३०७, २९०. ततियासत्तमीनञ्च 

३०८, ३१७. Bal च 

३०९, ३१८. दुतियापञ्चमीनञ्च 

३१०, ३२४. कम्मकरणनिमित्तत्यैसु सत्तमी 

३११, ३२५. सम्पदाने च 

३१२, ३२६. पञ्चम्यत्थे च 

३१३, ३२७. कालभावेसु च 

३१४, ३२८. उपध्याधिकिस्सरवचने 

३१५, ३२९. मण्डितुस्सुक्केसु ततिया च 











इति नामकप्पे कारककणप्पो छट्टो कण्डो 
कारकसुत्तं निट्टितँ। 


४. समास 


३१६, ३३१. नामानं समासौ युत्तत्थो 

३१७, ३३२. तेसं विभत्तियो लोपा च 

३१८, ३३३. पकति चस्स सरन्तस्स 

३१९, ३३०. उपसग्गनिपातपुव्को अब्ययीभावो 

३२०, ३३५. सो नपुंसकलिङ्गो 

३२१. ३४९. दिगुस्सैकततं 

333, ३५९. तथा डन्दे पाणितूरिययोग्गसेनङ्गखुद्दजन्तुकविविधविरूद्ध 
विसभागत्थादीनञ्च 

333, ३६०. विभासा रुक्खतिणपसुधनधञ्ञजनपदादीनञ्च 

३२४, ३३९. द्विपदे तुल्याधिकरणे कम्मधारयो 














103 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


३२५, ३४८. सङ्घ्यापुव्बी दिगु 

३२६, ३४१. उभे तप्पुरिसा 

३२७, ३५१. अमादयो परपदेभि 

३२८, ३५२. अञ्ञपदत्थैसु बहुब्बीहि 

३२९, ३५७. नामानं समुच्चयो द्वन्दो 

३३०, ३४०. महतं महा तुल्याधिकरणे पदे 
३३१, ३५३. इत्थियं भासितपुमित्थी पुमाव चे 
३३२, ३४३. कम्मधारयसञ्ञे च 

३३३, ३४४. Ad नस्स तप्पुरिसे 

३३४, ३४५. सरे अन्‌ 

३३५, ३४६. कद्‌ HA 

३३६, ३४७. काप्पत्थेसु च 

३३७, ३५०. क्वचि समासन्तगतान मकारन्तो 
३३८, ३५६. नदिम्हा च 

३३९, ३५८. जायाय तु दंजानि पतिम्हि 
३४०, ३५५. धनुम्हा च 

३४१, ३३६. अं विभत्तीन मकारन्ता अव्ययीभावा 
३४२, ३३७. सरो रस्सो नपुंसके 

३४३, ३३८. अञ्ञस्मा लोपो च 











इति नामकप्पे समासकप्पो सत्तमो कण्डो 
समाससुत्तं Pied 


५. तद्धित 


२४४, ३६१. वा णा'पच्चे 

३४५, ३६६. णायन णान वच्छादितो 

३४६, ३६७. णेय्यो कत्ति्दीहि 

३४७, ३६८. अतो णि वा 

३४८, ३७१. णवोपक्वादीहि 

३४९, ३७२. णेर विधवादितो 

३५०, ३७३. येन वा Gag atta चरति वहति णिको 

३५१, ३७४. तमधीते तेनकतादि सन्निधान नियोग सिप्प भण्ड जीविकव्यैसु च 
३५२, ३७६. ण रागा तस्सेद मञ्ञत्यैसु च 











104 


Order of Suttas 


जातादीन मिमिया च 
समूहत्थे कण्‌ णा 
गामजनबन्धुसहायादीहि ता 
तदस्स ठान मियो च 
उपमत्थायितत्तं 
तन्निस्सितत्थै लो 

आलु तब्बहुठे 

ण्यत्तता भावे तु 

ण विसमादीहि 
रमणीयादितो कण्‌ 
विसेसे तरतमिसिकियिड्टा 
तदस्सत्थीति वी च 
तपादितो सी 








. दण्डादितो इकई 

. मध्वादितो रो 

. गुणादितो वन्तु 

. सत्यादीहि मन्तु 

. सद्धादितो ण 

. आयुस्सुकारास मन्तुम्हि 
. तप्पकतिवचने मयो 
. सज्ञ्यापूरणे मो 
.सछस्सवा 

. एकादितो दसस्सी 

. दसे सो निच्चञ्च 


अन्ते निग्गहितञ्च 


faa 

ल दरानं 

. वीसतिदसैसु बा द्विस्स तु 
. एकादितो दस्स र WES 
. अड्डादितो च 

. Shs माकारो वा 

. चतुच्छेहि थठा 

. द्वितीहि तियो 

. तिये दुतापि च 


105 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 





३८७, ४११. तेस मठूपपदेन ageleasleagsiaal 

३८८, ६८. सरूपान मेकसेस्वसकि 

३८९, ४१३. गणने दसस्स द्वितिचतुपञ्चछसत्तअट्टनवकानं वीतिचत्तार 
पञ्ञाछसत्तासनवा योसु योनञ्चीसमासंठिरितीतुति 

३९०, २५६. चतूपपदस्स लोपो तुत्तरपदादिचस्स चुचोपि नवा 

३९१, ४२३. यदनुपपन्ना निपातना सिज्झन्ति 

३९२, ४१८. द्वादितो को Awe च 

३९३, ४१५. दसदसकं सतं दसकानं सतं सहस्सञ्च ue 

३९४, ४१६. याव तदुत्तरे दसगुणितञ्च 

३९५, ४१७. सकनामेहि 

३९६, ३६३. तेसं णो लोपं 

३९७, ४२०. विभागे धा च 

३९८, ४२१. सव्बनामेहि पकारवचने तु था 

३९९, ४२२. किमिमेहि थं 

४००, ३६४. वुद्धादिसरस्स वा संयोगन्तस्स सणे च 

४०१, ३७५. मा यून मागमो ठाने 

४०२. ३७७. आत्तञ्च 

४०३, ३५४. क्वचादिमज्झृत्तरानं दीघरस्सा पच्चयेसु च 

४०४, ३७०. तेसु वुद्धि लोपागम विकार विपरीतादेसा च 

४०५, ३६५. अयुवण्णानञ्चायौ वुद्धि 


इति नामकप्पे तद्धितकप्पो seat कण्डो 
तद्धितसुत्तं Psd 


























६. आख्यात 


४०६, ४२९. अथ पुब्बानि विभत्तीनं छ परस्सपदानि 
४०७, ४३९. परान्यत्तनोपदानि 

४०८, ४३१. द्वे ढे पठममञ्झिमुत्तमपुरिसा 

४०९, ४४१. सब्बैस मेकाभिधाने परो पुरिसो 

४१०, ४३२. नामम्हि पयुज्जमानेपि तुल्याधिकरणे पठमो 
४११, ४३६. तुम्हे मञ्झिमो 

४१२, ४३७. अम्हे उत्तमो 


106 


Order of Suttas 


४१३, ४२७. काले 
४१४, ४२८. वत्तमाना पच्चुप्पन्न 
४१५, ४५१. आणल्यासिद्ेनुत्तकाठे पञ्चमी 
४१६, ४५४. अनुमतिपरिकप्पत्थेसु सत्तमी 
४१७, ४६०. अपच्चक्खे परोक्खातीते 
४१८, ४५६. हिय्योपभुति पच्चक्खे हिय्यत्तनी 
४१९, ४६९. समीपेज्जतनी 
४२०, ४७१. मायोगे सब्बकाले च 
४२१, ४७३. अनागते भविस्सन्ती 
४२२, ४७५. किरियातिपच्ने तीते कालातिपत्ति 
४२३, ४२६. वत्तमाना ती अन्ति, सि थ, मि म, ते अन्ते, से व्हे, ए म्हे 
४२४, ४५०. पञ्चमी तु अन्तु, हि थ, मि म, d अन्तं, स्सु व्हो, ए आमसे 
४२५, ४५३. ATA एय्य UA, एय्यासि एय्याथ, एय्यामि एय्याम, 
एथ ui, एथो एय्याव्हो, Uzz] एय्याम्हे 
४२६, ४५९. परोक्खा अ उ, ए त्थ, अं म्ह, त्थ रे, त्थो व्हो, इं म्हे 
४२७, ४५५. PA आ ऊ, ओ त्थ, अं म्हा, त्थ Gl से S, इं म्हसे 
४२७, ४६८. अज्जतनी ई उं, ओ त्थ, इं म्हा, आ ऊ, से व्हं, AR 
४२९, ४७२. भविस्सन्ती स्सति स्सन्ति, स्ससि स्सथ, स्सामि स्साम, 
स्सते स्सन्ते, स्ससे WS, nd स्साम्हे 
४३०, ४७४. कालातिपत्ति स्सा स्संसु, A स्सथ, स्सं स्साम्हा, 
स्सथ स्सिंसु, स्ससै स्सव्हे, स्सं स्साम्हसे 
४३१, ४५८. हिय्यत्तनी सत्तमी पञ्चमी वत्तमाना सब्बधातुकं 
इति आख्यातकप्पे पठमो कण्डो 























४३२, ३६२. धातुलिङ्गेहि परा पच्चया 

४३३, ५२८. तिजगुपकितमानेहि खछसा वा 

४३४, ५३४. भुजघसहरसुपादीहि तुमिच्छत्थेसु 

४३५, ५३६. आय नामतो कत्तूपमाना दाचारे 

४३६, ५३७. ईयूपमाना च 

४३७, ५३८. नामम्हात्तिच्छत्थै 

४३८, ५४०. धातूहि णेणयणापेणापया कारितानि हेत्वत्ये 
४३९, ५३९. धातुरूपे नामस्मा णयो च 

४४०, ४४५. भावकम्मेसु यो 

४४१, ४४७. तस्स चवग्गयकारवकारत्तं सधात्वन्तस्स 


107 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


४४२, ४४८. 
४४३, ४४९. 
४४४, ५११. 
४४५, ४३३. 
४४६, ५०९. 
४४७, ५१०. 
४४८, ५१२. 
४४९, ५१३. 
४००, ५१७. 
४५१, ५२०. 
४५२, ५२५. 
४५३, ४४४. 
४५४, ४४०. 
४५५, ५३०. 
४५६, ४३०. 
४५७, ४२४. 


४०८, ४६१. 
४५९, ४६२. 
४६०, ५०६. 
४६१, ४६४. 
४६२, ४६७. 
४६३, ५३२. 
४६४, ५०४. 
४६५, ४६३. 
४६६, ४८९. 
४६७, ५३३. 
४६८, ४९२. 
४६९, ४९४, 
४७०, ५१४. 
४७१, ४८३. 
४७२, ५३१. 
४७३, ५२९. 


इवण्णागमो वा 
पुब्बरूपञ्च 
तथा कत्तरि च 
भूवादितो अ 
रुधादितो निग्गहितपुव्बञ्च 
दिवादितो यो 
स्वादितो णुणाउणा च 
कियादितो ना 
गहादितो प्पण्हा 
तनादितो ओयिरा 
चुरादितो णेणया 
अत्तनोपदानि भावे च कम्मनि 
कत्तरि च 
धातुप्पच्चयेहि विभत्तियौ 
कत्तरि परस्सपदं 
भूवादयो धातवो 

इति आख्यातकप्पे दुतियो कण्डो 




















क्वचादिवण्णान मेकस्सरानं द्वेभावो 
पुब्बो ब्भासो 

रस्सी 

दुतियचतुत्थानं पठमततिया 
कवग्गस्स चवग्गो 

मानकितानं वतत्तं वा 

हस्स जो 

अन्तस्सिवण्णाकारो वा 
निग्गहितञ्च 

ततो पामानानं वामं सेसु 

ठा fast 

पा पिवो 

ञास्स जाजंना 

दिसस्स पस्सदिस्सदक्खा वा 
व्यञ्जनन्तस्स चो छप्पच्चयेसु च 
को खे च 








108 


, ९३५. 
४६५. 
४४२. 
४७९, 
४३८. 
BRR, 
४९०. 
QRS, 


७५७०८. 
५२७. 
५४२. 
४३४. 
०४३. 
४७८, 
४८१. 
a Sis 
५१८. 
५२३. 
४९९. 
४९८. 
४९५. 
Goo, 
४९७. 
४७७. 
४८०. 
७०७. 
४८६. 
४४३. 
४९३. 
४८७. 
४७०. 
४८२. 


हरस्स गी से 
ब्रूभून माहभूवा परोक्खायं 
गमिस्सन्तो च्छो वा सब्बासु 
वचस्सज्जतनिम्हि मकारो ओ 
अकारो दीघं हिमिमेसु 
हि लोपं वा 
होतिस्सरेहोहे भविस्सन्तिम्हि स्सस्स च 
करस्स सपच्चयस्स काहो 
इति आख्यातकप्पे ततियो कण्डो 





दादन्तस्सं मिमेसु 

असंयोगन्तस्स वुद्धि कारिते 
घटादीनं वा 

अञ्जेसु च 

गुहदुसानं दीघं 

वचवसवहादीन मुकारी वस्स ये 
ह विपरिययो लो वा 
गहस्स घे UI 

हलोपो ण्हाम्हि 

करस्स कासत्त मज्जतनिम्हि 
असस्मा मिमानं मिम्हान्तलोपो च 
थस्स त्थत्तं 

तिस्स त्थित्तं 

तुस्स pd 

सिम्हि च 

लभस्मा ईइंनं त्थत्थं 

कुसस्मा दी च्छि 

दाधातुस्स दज्जं 

वदस्स quei 

गमिस्स uu 

यम्हि दाधामाठाहापामहमथादीन मी 
यजस्सादिस्सि 

सब्बतो उं इंसु 

जरमरानं जीरजिय्यमिस्या वा 


109 


Order of Suttas 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


५०६, ४९६. 
५०७, ५०१. 
५०८, ५१५. 
५०९, ५१६. 
५१०, ४८७. 
५११, ५२१. 
५१२, ५२२. 
५१३, ४३५. 
५१४, ४९१. 
५१५, ५४१. 
५१६, ४६६. 
५१७, ४८८. 
५१८, ४४६. 
५१९, ४५७. 
५२०, ५०२. 
५२१, ४२५. 
५२२, ४७६. 
५२३, ५२६. 


५२४, ५६९. 
५२५, ५६५. 
५२६, ५६७. 
५२७, ५६८. 
५२८, ५७७. 
५२९, ५८०. 
५३०, ५८४. 
५३१, ५८९. 
५३२, ५९०. 
५३३, ५९१. 
५३४, ५९२. 


सब्बत्थासस्सादिलोपो च 
असब्बधातुके भू 
एय्यस्स ञातो इया ञा 
नास्स लोपो यकारत्तं 
लोपञ्चेत्त मकारी 
उत्त मोकारो 
करस्साकारी च 
ओ अव सरे 
ए अय 
ते आवाया कारिते 
इकारागमो असबव्बधातुकम्हि 
क्वचि धातुविभत्तिप्पच्चयानं दीघविपरीतादेसलोपागमा च 
अत्तनोपदानि परस्सपदत्तं 
अकारागमो हिय्यत्तनीअज्जतनीकालातिपत्तीसु 
ब्रूतो ई तिम्हि 
धातुस्सन्तो लोपोनेकसरस्स 
इसुयमून मन्तो च्छो वा 
कारितानं णो लोपं 
इति आख्यातकप्पे चतुत्थो कण्डो 
आख्यातसुत्तं fred 


७. किब्बिधान 


धातुया कम्मादिम्हि णो 
सञ्जाय म नु 

पुरे ददा च इ 

सब्बतो ण्वुत्वावी वा 
विसरुजपदादितो ण 
भावे च 

क्वि च 

धरादीहि रम्मो 
तस्सीलादीसु णीत्वावी च 
सद्दकुधचलमण्डत्थरुचादीहि यु 
पारादिगमिम्हा रू 











110 


५९३. 
५९४. 
५६६. 
५९५. 
५५८. 
५४५. 
५५२. 
५५७. 
५५५. 
५५६. 
५४८. 
५६२. 
५९६, 
५९७. 
५५०. 


५४६. 
५९८. 
६०९. 
५.३९. 
६०१. 
६१२. 
६२२. 
६०६. 
ROR. 
६०३. 
६०४. 
६३६. 
E36. 
६३९. 
६४०. 
६४६. 
७७४. 


Order of Suttas 


भिक्खादितो च 
हनत्यादीनं णुको 
नु निग्गहितं पदन्ते 
संहनाञ्ञायवा रो घो 
रम्हि रन्तो रादि नो 
भावकम्मेसु तब्बानीया 
ण्योच 
करम्हा रिच्च 
भूतोब्ब 
वदमदगमुयुजगरहाकारादीहि ज्जम्मग्गय्हेय्यागारो वा 
ते किच्चा 
अञ्ञे कित्‌ 
नन्दादीहि यु 
कत्तुकरणपदेसेसु च 
रहादितो ण 
इति किब्बिधानकप्पे पठमो कण्डो 


णादयो तेकालिका 

asa दाधातो इ 

ति कित्‌ uri 

इत्थिय मतियवो वा 

करतो REST 

अतीते ततवन्तुतावी 

भावकम्मेसु त 

बुधगमादित्थै paR 

जितो इन सब्बत्थ 

सुपतो च 

इच्छत्यैसु समानकत्तुकेसु तवेतुं वा 
अरहसक्कादीसु च 

पत्तवचने अलमत्थैसु च 
पुब्बकालेककतुकान तुनत्वानत्वा वा 
वत्तमाने मानन्ता 

सासादीहि TY 














111 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


५६७, ५७५. 
५६८, ५७६. 
५६९, ६१०. 
५७०, ६१९. 


५७१, 
५७२, 
५७३, 
५७४, 
५७५, 
५७६, 
५७७, 
५७८, 
५७९, 
५८०, 
५८१, 
५८२, 
५८३, 
५८४, 
५८५, 
५८६, ६००. 
५८७, ६३२. 
५८८,६२० 

५८९, ६२१. 


६२४. 
६२५. 
६२६. 
६१३. 
६१४. 
६०७. 
६२८. 
५६०. 
६२९. 
६३०. 
६१६. 
६३१. 
८१७. 
६१८. 
६१९. 


५९०, ५७९. 
५९१, ५४४. 
५९२, ५०३. 
५९३, ५६४. 
५९४, ५८२. 
५९५, ६३७. 
५९६, ५५१. 


पातितो रितु 
मानादीहि रातु 
आगमा तुको 
Yet इक 
इति किब्बिधानकप्मे दुतियो कण्डो 





पच्चयादनिद्ठा निपातना सिज्झन्ति 

सासदिसतो तस्स RA च 

सादि सन्तपुच्छभन्जहन्सादीहि zt 

वसतो उट्ट 

वस्स वा वु 

धढभहेहि धढा च 

भन्जतो ग्गो च 

भुजादीन मन्तो नो द्विच 

वच वा वु 

गुपादीनञ्च 

तरादीहि इण्णो 

भिदादितो इन्नअन्नईणा वा 

सुसपचसकतो FAA च 

पक्कमादीहि न्तो च 

जनादीन मा तिम्हि च 

गमखनहनरमादीनमन्तो 

रकारी च 

ठापान मिई च 

हन्तेहि हो हस्स ळो वा अदहनहानं 
इति किब्बिधानकप्पे ततियो कण्डो 

















णम्हि रन्जस्स जौ भावकरणेसु 

हनस्स घातो 

वधो वा सब्बत्थ 

आकारन्तान मायो 

पुरसमुपपरीहि करोतिस्स ख खरा वा तपच्चयेसु च 
तवेतुनादीसु का 

गमखनहनादीनं तुंतव्वादीसु न 


112 


Order of Suttas 


. सब्बेहि तुनादीन यो 

. चनन्तेहि ved 

. दिसा स्वानस्वान्तलोपो च 

. महदभेहि म्मय्हज्जब्भद्धा च 

. तद्धितसमासकितका नामं वातवेतुनादीसु च 











दुम्हि गरु 
दीघो च 


. अक्खरेहि कार 
. यथागम मिकारो 
. दधन्ततो यो क्वचि 


इति किब्बिधानकप्पे चतुत्थो कण्डो 


. निग्गहित संयोगादि नो 

. सब्बत्थ गेगी 

. सदस्स सीदत्तं 

. यजस्स सरस्सि E 

. हचतुत्थानमन्तानं दो धे 

. डो ढकारे 

. गहस्स घर णे वा 

. दहस्स दो ळं 

. धात्वन्तस्स लोपो क्विम्हि 
. विदन्ते ऊ 

. नमकरान मन्तानं नियृत्ततम्हि 
- न कगत्तं चजा ण्वुम्हि 

. करस्स च तल्लं तुस्मि 

. तुंतुनतव्बेसु वा 

. कारितं विय णानुबन्धो 

. अनका यु ण्वूनं 

. कगा चजानं 


इति किब्बिधानकप्पे पञ्चमो कण्डो 
किब्बिधानसुत्तं fife 


113 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


८. उणादिकप्प 


६२४, ५६३. कत्तरि कित्‌ 

६२५, ६०५. भावकम्मेसु किच्चक्तखत्था 

६२६, ६३४. कम्मनि दुतियायं क्तो 

६२७, ६५२. ख्यादीहि मन्‌ मचतो वा 

६२८, ६५३. समादीहि थमा 

६२९, ५६९. गहस्सुपधस्से वा 

६३०, ६५४. मसुस्स सुस्स च्छरच्छेरा 

६३१, ६५५. आपुब्बचरस्स च 

६३२, ६५६. अलकलसलेहि लया 

६३३, ६५७. याणलाणा 

६३४, ६५८. मथिस्स थस्स लो च 

६३५, ५५९. पेसातिसग्गपत्तकालेसु किच्चा 

६३६, ६५९. अवस्सकाधमिणेसु णी च 

६३७, ०. अरहसक्कादीहि तुं 

६३८, ६६८. वजादीहि पब्बज्जादयो निप्पज्जन्ते 

६३९, ५८५. क्विलोपो च 

६४०, o. सचजानं कगा णानुबन्धै 

६४१, ५७२. नुदादीहि युण्वून मनाननाकाननका सकारितेहि च 

६४२, ५८८. इयतमकिएसान मन्तस्सरो दीघं क्वचि दिसस्स गुणं दो रं 
सक्खी च 

६४३, ६३५. भ्यादीहि मतिबुधिपूजादीहि च क्तो 

६४४, ६६१. वैपुसीदववमुकुदाभूह्णादीहि थुत्तिमणिमा निव्वत्ते 

६४५, ६६२. अक्कोसै नम्हानि 

६४६, ४१९. एकादिती सकिस्स qud 

६४७, ६६३. सुनस्सुनस्सोणवानुवानूनुनखुनाना 

६४८, ६६४. तरुणस्स सुसु च 

६४९, ६६५. युवस्सुवस्सुवुवानुनूना 

६५०, ६५१. काले वत्तमानातीते ण्वादयो 

६५१, ६४७. भविस्सति गमादीहि णीघिण्‌ 

६५२, ६४८. किरियायं ण्वुतवौ 

६५३, ३०६. भाववाचिम्हि चतुत्थी 

६५४, ६४९. कम्मनि णो 























114 


६५५, 
६५६, 
६५७, 
६५८, 
६५९, 
६६०, 
६६१, 
६६२, 
६६३, 
६६४, 
६६५, 
६६६, 
६६७, 
६६८, 
६६९, 
६७०, 
६७१, 
६७२, 
६७३, 


६५०. 
६६६. 
६६७. 
RC. 
६६९. 
६७०. 
६७१. 
६७२. 
५७३. 
६७४. 
६७५. 
६७६. 
gM. 
६७८. 
६७९. 
६८०. 
६८१. 
६८२. 
६८३. 


WU स्संन्तुमानाना 

छदादीहि TAU 

वदादीहि णित्तो गणे 

मिदादीहि त्तितियो 

उसुरन्जदंसानं FAA agp ढठा च 
सूवुसान मूवुसान मतो थो च 
रन्जुदादीहि धदिद्दकिरा क्वचि जदलोपो च 
पटितो हिस्स हेरण्‌ हीरण्‌ 
कड्यादीहि को 

खादामगमानं खन्धन्धगन्धा 
पटादीह्यलं 

पुथस्स पुथुपथा मो वा 

सस्वादीहि तुदवो 

च्यादीहि ईवरो 

मुनादीहि चि 

विदादीह्यूरो 

हनादीहि णुनुतवो 

कुटादीहि ठो 

मनुपूरसुणादीहि उस्सणुसिसा 


इति किब्बरिधानकप्पे उणादिकप्पो wet कण्डो 
उणादिसुत्तं Rfi 








115 


Order of Suttas 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


116 


(a) 


(b) 


Sandhi 


MAHA KACCAYANA 
SADDA PATHA 
PALI GRAMMAR TEXT 


1. Sandhi Kappa 


Euphonic Combinations Chapter 


Pathama Kanda 
The First Section 


Ratanattaya-vandana 
Homage to Triple Gem 


Settham tilokamahitam abhivandiya' ggam, 
Buddhaii'ca Dhamma’mamalam Gana' muttamari’ca, 
Satthussa tassa vacana'tthavaram subuddhum, 
Vakkhami suttahita’mettha Susandhikappam. 


Having bowed down to the Buddha, 

the most praised, Honored by three worlds 

of human, divine beings and Brahma (Gods), 
And the holiest of the world, 

To the sacred Dhamma and the noble Sangha. 


I will expound the grammar (starting with) 
the good chapter of Sandhi-section 

For easily understanding of the sacred 
words of Buddha, to benefit (those studying) 
Buddhist scriptures. 


Seyyam jine’ritanayena budha labhanti, 
Tafi’ca’pi tassa vacana'tthasubodhanena, 
atthafi' ca akkharapadesu amohabhava, 
seyya'tthiko padamato vividham suneyya. 


The wise realize the supreme happiness, 
In the way as taught by the Lord Buddha. 


117 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


That way is to be acquired only through 

a good understanding of the meaning 

of the sacred words and by being free 

from any confusion on the meaning 

of the sacred words. Therefore, anyone 
aspiring to attain supreme happiness, 

should learn the grammar about various words. 


१, १. अत्थो अक्खरसञ्ञातो 
l, 1. Attho akkharasaññāto. [Attho+akkharasaññāto, 2 words] 
[V] Sabbavacanāna’mattho akkharehe'va safifiayate. 
Akkharavipattiyam hi atthassa du’nnayatā hoti. 
Tasma akkharakosallarh bahü'pakaram suttantesu. 


The meaning of all words can be understood only by means 
of letters (words). Verily, in case of corrupt letters, the cor- 
rect meaning of words is difficult to know. Therefore, hav- 
ing the skilled knowledge of letters, (i.e. grammatical 
knowledge) is of much benefit in (the study of) texts. 


3, २. अक्खरापादयो एकचत्ताढीसं 
2, 2. Akkhara’pa’dayo ekacattalisam. 
[Akkhara-api*ta-adayo-ekacattalisam. 4 words] 
[V] Te ca kho akkhara'api akara'dayo ekacattalisam suttantesu 
so'pakara. 
Those “a” and so on, amounting forty-one letters, called 
“akkhara-the alphabets” are of great benefit in (the study 
of) Pali texts. 
Tam yatha? What are those akkhara"? 
They are: 
a, à, i, 1, u, पे, e, ०, 
ka, kha, ga, gha, na, 
ca, cha, ja, jha, fia, 
ta, tha, da, dha, na, 
ta, tha, da, dha, na, 
118 


Sandhi 


pa, pha, ba, bha, ma, 

ya, ra, la, va, sa, ha, la, am, 

iti akkhara nama. These are called *akkhara, the letters". 
Tena kva’ttho? Attho akkharasaiifiato. 

What is the benefit by mentioning akkhra? 

It has the benefit of making easy reference in Suttas such as 
“Attho akkharasafitiato". 

Summary: This Sutta explains and names the forty-one 
Pali alphabets. 


3, 3 तत्थोदन्ता सरा ag 
3, 3. Tattho’danta sara attha. 
[Tatthat+o-antat+sara+attha. 4 words] 
[V] Tattha akkharesu akara'disu o’danta attha akkhara sara 
nama honti. 


Of those “forty-one akkhras", the eight vowels, beginning 
with letter “a” and ending in “o”, are called “sara, vowels". 
Tarh yatha? 

What are those Sara? 

Namely: 

A, 4, i, I, प, पं, e, 0, iti sarà nama. 

These are called “Sara, vowels". 

Tena kva'ttho? Sara sare lopam. 

What is the benefit by naming that "sara"? 

It has the benefit of making easy reference in Suttas such as 
"Sara sare lopam". 

Summary: This Sutta formally names eight Pali vowels as 
"sara-vowels". 


Y, ४. लहुमत्ता तयो रस्सा 
4, 4. Lahumatta tayo rassa. [Lahumatti+tayo+rassa. 3 words] 
[V] Tattha atthasu saresu lahumatta tayo sara rassa nama honti. 


119 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


Of those eight “Sara (vowels) ", the three Sara which have a 
short duration of utterance are called *Rassa-short vowels". 
Tam yatha? 

What are those Rassa? 

Namely: 

A, i, u, iti rassa nama. 

A, 1, u, These are called Rassa. 

Tena kvattho? Rassath. 

What is the benefit by naming that “rassa”? 

It has the benefit of easy reference in Suttas such as “Ras- 
sam". 

Summary: This Sutta terms three short vowels known as 
"rassa-the vowels of short sounds". 


५, ५. अञ्ञे दीघा 

5, 5. Afihie digha. [Aññe+dīghā. 2 words] 

[V] Tattha atthasu saresu rassehi afifie pafica sara digha nama 
honti. 


Of the eight Sara (vowels), the other five sara (vowels) are 
called *Digha-Long vowels, i.e. the Sara which have a 
longer duration of utterance". 

Tam yatha? 

What are those Digha? 

Namely: 

A, I, ü, e, 0, iti digha nama. 

“A, 1, ü, e, o”, These are called Digha. 

Tena kva’ttho? Digham. 

What benefit is there by naming that “digha”? 

It has the benefit of easy reference in Suttas such as 
“Digharh”. 

Summary: This Sutta terms five long vowels known as 
“digha-the vowels of long sound". 


120 


Sandhi 


६, ८. सेसा ब्यञ्जना 

6, 8. Sesa byafijana. [Sesa+byarijana. 2 words] 

[V] Thapetva attha sare sesa akkhara ka-kara'dayo niggahi- 
ta’nta byafijana nama honti. 


Excluding the eight Saras (vowels), the remaining thirty- 
three letters beginning with “ka” and ending in Niggahita 
"am", are called “Byafijana-consonants”. 
Tarh yatha? 
What are those byafijana (consonants) ? 
Namely: 
Ka, kha, ga, gha, na, 
ca, cha, ja, jha, ña, 
ta, tha, da, dha, na, 
ta, tha, da, dha, na, 
pa, pha, ba, bha, ma, 
ya, ra, la, va, 
sa, ha, la, am, 
iti byafijana nama. 
These are called byanfijana (consonants). 
Tena kva'ttho? Sara pakati byarijane. 
What is the benefit by mentioning that “byarijana (conso- 
nant) "? 
It has the benefit of easy reference in Suttas such as “Sara 
pakati byafijane". 
Summary: This Sutta terms thirty-three Pali consonants as 
^byafijana-those that manifest the meaning". 
Note: The vowel “a” after each consonant is included for the 
purpose of easy utterance. Actually, the consonants are better 
represented without any vowel such as *K, kh, g, gh, n, c, ch, j, 
jh, ñ, t, th, d, dh, n, t, th, d, dh, n, p, ph, b, bh, m, y, r, 1, v, s, 
h, |, i 


121 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


७, ९. वग्गा पञ्चपञ्चसो मन्ता 
7, 9. Vagga paficapaficaso ma’nta. 
[Vagga-paficapaficaso--ma-anta. 3 words] 
[V] Tesam kho byafijananam ka-kara’dayo ma-kara'nta 
paficapaficaso akkharavanto vagga nama honti. 


Of those byafijana (consonants), the letters beginning with 
“ka” and ending in “ma” which are grouped together in 
fives of each, are called *vaggas-the groups". 

Tam yatha? 

What are those vaggas (groups) ? 

Namely: 

Ka, kha, ga, gha, na, (This group is called Ka-vagga) 
ca, cha, ja, jha, fia, (This group is called Ca-vagga) 

ta, tha, da, dha, na, (This group is called Ta-vagga) 

ta, tha, da, dha, na, (This group is called Ta-vagga) 

pa, pha, ba, bha, ma. (This group is called Pa-vagga) 

iti vagga nama. 

These are called * Vagga" . 

Tena kva'ttho? Vaggantam và vagge. 

What is the benefit by mentioning that “Vaggas (groups) "? 
It has the benefit of ease of reference in Suttas such as 
"Vaggantam va vagge”. 

Summary: This Sutta names the fives of each group as 
“vagga-the group" being grouped together out of the twenty- 
five Pali consonants. There are five vaggas each comprising 
five consonants. “ù, fi, n, n, m" are formally called Vag- 
ganta-the end consonants of the group, also called “nasal stops” 
(Vagga-grouptanta-end). Knowing and understanding these 
vagga-groups and their end-consonants will help in under- 
standing some of the complex morphological procedures 
which will be explained in this grammar. 


122 


Sandhi 


८, १०.अंइति निग्गहितं 
8, 10. Am iti niggahitam?. [Am-ititniggahitarh. 2 words] 
[V] Am iti niggahitam nama hoti. 


The letter “am” is called “niggahita” 


Tena kva’ttho? Am byafyane niggahitam. 

What is the benefit by mentioning "niggahita"? 

It has the benefit of ease of reference in Suttas such as “Am 
byafijane niggahitam". 

Summary: This Sutta names one nasalized “am” as the 
"niggahita". See the footnote. 


? A Niggahita is represented by the consonant “th” in the Romanized Pali. It 
is called *Niggahita" as it has to be uttered or sounded out through nasal pas- 
sage by having the necessary parts of the mouth which serve as a mechanism 
of the speech or spoken sound such as lip etc, gently pressed while at the 
same time other parts such as tongue, teeth, etc, remain inactive during the 
enunciation process. [Niggahita-niVgaha-ta] 
[Reference Text] Rassasaram nissaya gayhati, karanam niggahetva 
gayhati’ti và niggahitam. 
(Translation) It is called Niggahita as it is uttered being based on short vow- 
els, also because it is spoken with the act of enunciation (karana) the sources 
of voice (thana) being repressed. Here, the root “gaha” prefixed with an 
upasagga particle “ni” means to press and to restrain. 

Karanam Niggahetvana, mukhend 'vivafena yam 

Vuccate niggahita 'nti, Vuttam Bindhusard nugam. (Rüpasiddhi) 
(Translation) This sound of dot is said by restrained act of utterance, with 
mouth (lips) kept unopened. So, this “dot” is called “niggahita” which used to 
depend on (three) short vowels. 
In Thai, Burmese and Devanagari alphabets, it is usually represented by a 
small dot on top of the letters it joined. See these following sample words: 
Thai á, Burmese 59, Devanagari अ. 
The niggahita is usually found joined on top of only three rassa (short) vow- 
els “a, i, u”. It is called an “anusvara” in Sanskrit. Some grammarians view it 
as a semi-vowel as well as a semi-consonant as it is interchangeable in the 
morphological procedure of Pali grammar. Please note that only “th” is called 
Niggahita while “a” is added for the purpose of easy utterance. 


123 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


९, ११.परसमञ्ञा पयोगे 

9, 11. Parasamanna payoge. [Parasamafifiatpayoge. 2 words] 

[V] Ya ca pana paresu sakkataganthesu samanfia ghosa’ti va, 
aghosa'ti va, tà payoge sati ettha'pi yujjante. 


Any grammatical term such as “ghosa or aghosa and so 
forth, which are used in other Sanskrit grammar texts, can 
also be applied here in this Pali grammar as and when ap- 
propriate and applicable. 


Tattha ghosa nama- 

Of those terms, the following are called “ghosa-voiced or 
sonants". 

ga gha na, ja jha fia, 

da dha na, da dha na, 

ba bha ma, ya ra la va ha la, (21) 

iti ghosa nàma. 

These are *ghosa". 

Aghosa nama- 

Those called “aghosa-unvoiced, or surds" are: 

ka kha, ca cha, ta tha, ta tha, pa pha, sa, (11) 

iti aghosa nama. 

These are *aghosa". 

Tena kva'ttho? Vagge ghosa'ghosanam tatiyapathama. 
What is the benefit by mentioning that *ghosa and aghosa"? 
It has the benefit of ease of reference in Suttas such as 
“Vagge ghosa'ghosanam tatiyapathama". 

Summary: This Sutta states permissibility to use some of 
the relevant grammatical terms such as “Ghosa and 
Aghosa” etc., which are used in the Sanskrit grammars. 


124 


Sandhi 


१०, १२. पुब्बमधोठितमस्सरं सरेन वियोजये 
10, 12. Pubba’madhothita’massaram sarena 
viyojaye. 
[Pubbam-adhothitamr-assaram-sarenatviyo]aye. 5 words] 
[V] Tattha sandhim kattukamo pubbabyaiijanarh adhothitam 
assaram katva, sarafi’ca upari katva, sarena viyojaye. 





There, when wanting to conduct the grammatical procedure 
of Sandhi (Euphonic combination of words), the preceding 
front consonant has to be put below and make it vowel-less 
by separating it from its attached vowel and keep the sepa- 
rated vowel above. For example, “० Tatra’ya’madi” 


Summary: This Sutta sets the rule to separate the conso- 
nant from vowel it is attached to before performing any 
morphological procedure such as eliding, shortening, 
lengthening or changing into other forms of syllables etc., 
can be carried out properly. The functions prescribed in 
Sutta 10 and 11 are two important fundamental proce- 
dures of the morphology in the Pali grammar. 
Example: Tatra’ya’ madi. 

(Here, three words “Tatra, ayarh and adi”, are combined in a Sandhi). 
See * the apostrophe marks shown as a sign of Sandhi). In this 
example, the point of Sandhi is shown by apostrophe mark °. 
Please carefully note this mark as all sign of Sandhi will be 
shown by this mark throughout this book. Note that there are 
two points of Sandhi in this example, one between tra’ya and 
the other between ya and ma. Now, it will look like this when 
all the combined words are separated: 








Tatratayam+adi 
(3 words. 2 Point of Sandhi being separated are shown by + sign) 
[Tatra-at that Nibbana. ayarh-this four kind of purity. adi-is the beginning] 


Note: The separation process of consonant from vowel as prescribed by this 

Sutta may seem quite irrelevant in Romanized letters as they are already sep- 
arated. In Pali written in Devanagari or in Burmese etc., it is quite relevant 
and necessary as the vowels are usually written by being joined in one single 


125 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


letter comprising both a vowel and a consonant such as कि, की, कु, कू, 03, ०, 


op, op. In these sample words, the diacritical marks symbolize vowels which 
need to be separated. 


११, १४. नये परं युत्ते 

11, 14. Naye param yutte. [Naye+pararityutte. 3 words] 

[V] Assaram kho byafijanam adhothitam para'kkharam naye 
yutte. 


The vowel-less consonant being kept below, should be re- 
attached to the rear (next) letter when appropriate. (i.e. after 
all due morphological procedures have been done). 
Summary: This Sutta sets the rule to re-attach the sepa- 
rated consonant to the next vowel after any necessary 
morphological procedure such as eliding, shortening, 
lengthening have been done. 


Below is an example of Sandhi. Note that there are two (°) apostrophe marks 
which show point of Sandhi. 


[CS] 


[SS] 


[ME] 


* Tatra’ bhirati’miccheyya. (3 words, CS means combined in 
Sandhi) 

(Meaning) Tatra-at that three kind of tranquility. abhiratirh-joy. 
iccheyya-(one) should prefer. i.e. One should prefer enjoying at that 
three kind of tranquility, peace. 

Tatra+abhiratim+iccheyya. (SS means Sandhi Separated, 3 
words) 


Morphological Explanation of Example [ME] 
Here, Sandhi is between two points where bold-faced letters with a 
plus sign are shown. 
The steps to make these separated words of Sandhi to be recom- 
bined into a perfect Sandhi. 
Now let's study the necessary morphological procedures on the 
first point of Sandhi: 
(1) First the initial “a” in front of the plus sign is to be elided as per 
Sutta 12. It then looks like this: Tatr+abhiratirh+iccheyya. 
(2) Then the next “a” is to be lengthened by procedure as prescribed 
in Sutta 15. It now becomes > Tatr+abhiratirht+iccheyya. 


126 


Sandhi 


664.99 


(3) By procedure of this Sutta 11, the vowel-less “r” is then to be at- 
tached to next lengthened “a” > Tatrabhiratirh+iccheyya. 

Now let’s work on the second point of Sandhi: 

(1) “th” is to be changed into “m” by the procedure as per Sutta 34. It 
then becomes > Tatrabhiratim+iccheyya. 

(2) By procedure of this Sutta 11, “m” is to be attached to next vowel 
“i”. Now finally morphed form is > Tatrabhiratimiccheyya. 


Thus through all due procedures as shown in these Suttas, it becomes 
a complete word. The students do not need to remember all this. 
They just only need to learn how morphological procedures as said in 
the Suttas are carried out in the various stages of evolution of the Pali 
words. This will help them learn the structural patterns of the word 
and gain some insight into the language patterns and achieve mastery 
of language to some degree, which in many ways can greatly benefit 
in the study of Buddhist texts written in Pali. Keep in mind that the 
role of Sutta 10 and 11 are always necessary as far as the study of 
morphological procedures of words are concerned in the Pali 
grammar. 


Yutte’ti kasma? 

Why the word “yutte” is included in Sutta? 

* Akkocchi mam, *avadhi mam, *ajini mam, *ahasi me. 
Akkocchi-(he) reviled. marh-me. avadhi-(he) hurt. mam-me. ajini- 
(he) conquered. marh-me, ahasi-(he) took me-my (things). 

Ettha pana yuttam na hoti. 

Here in this example “Akkocchi mam etc.,”, there is no 
*yutta", hence no need to re-attach any vowel-less conso- 
nant in those phrases. (In such examples, the term *yutte", 


as a result, is irrelevant and inapplicable.) 

Note: Yutta means being appropriate, i.e. the applicability of Sandhi 
procedure. 

Kasma-kim-what+sma-for, ablative case-ending. i.e. Why?. 


Iti sandhikappe pathamo kando. 
The First Section of Sandhi ends. 


127 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


१२, 
12, 
[V] 


Dutiya Kanda 


The Second Section 


१३. सरा सरे लोपं 
13. Sara sare lopam. [Sara+sare+loparn. 3 words] 
Sara kho sare pare loparh papponti. 


When a Sara (vowel) follows, the preceding vowel is to be 
elided. 

Summary: The function of this Sutta elides the front vow- 
el when two vowels of different words are in a union after 
the separation of Sandhi, one in the front, and the other next 
to it. 


[CS] (a) * Yass’indriyani samathan’ gatani. 


[SS] 


(b) * No he'tam bhante. 
(c) ० Sameta’yasma sanghena. 


(a) Yassa-indriyani. 
Yassa-of whose. indriyani-faculties. 
[Here see union of two vowels, one the last “a” of the word Yas- 
sa, the other front “i” of the word indriyani. The front “a” is to 
be elided.] 

(b) No hi*etam bhante. 
No hi-is not appropriate. etam-this fact. bhante-Lord Buddha. 
[Here, union occurs between “i and e”.] 

(c) Sametu+ayasma sanghena. 
Sametu-let it be harmonious. ayasma-Y our venerable. sanghe- 
na-with community of Sangha. [Here, union occurs between “u 
and 4”. ] 


Now look at separations of Sandhi shown above. There is a union of 

two vowels, one in the front and one next to it in each separated San- 
dhi, shown by means of a plus+ sign. 

The front vowel is to be elided as per this Sutta. Then the vowel-less 

consonant in front of the elided vowel is to be attached to next vowel 
after the plus sign as prescribed by Sutta 11. Then it becomes a com- 

plete word perfectly combined in Sandhi. 

The whole procedure is quite simple and easy to understand though it 
may at first seem a bit complex process for a beginner. 


128 


Sandhi 


The Structural Morphology: 
(This will be abbreviated as [SM] throughout this book) 
[SM] Just elide or wipe out the front vowels (a) a (b) i (c) u and attach all 
front three vowel-less consonants (a) s (b) h (c) t to next vowels. It is 
done! This means that once it is done, it will be combined into a 
Sandhi such as those shown in [CS] 


$3, १५. वा परो असरूपा 
13, 15. Và paro asarüpa. [Vi+paro+asariipa. 3 words] 
[V] Saramhà asarüpa!? paro saro loparh pappoti vali. 


The next dissimilar vowel from the preceding dissimilar 
one (in a union of two different vowels) is to be elided 


sometimes. 
(This Sutta elides next vowel out of a union of two non-homogenous, 
different vowels. See the examples) 


[CS] (a)* Cattaro' me bhikkhave dhamma. 
(b) * Kinnu’ma’va samaniyo. 


10 Asarüpa-a-not, sa-similar, rüpa-shape, the vowels which are not the same 
in shape. They are also called Asavanna. [a-not, sa-same, vanna-shape, i.e. 
akkhara, letter.] Reversely, the similar ones are called sarüpa or savanna. 
(*Sa" derives from Samana-similar). a & à are sarüpa or savanna to each 
other. So are i & I, u & ü to each other. This is called sarüpa or savanna. 
Reversely, a , à are asarüpa or asavanna to i, I, प, ü & e, o. So are i, I to the 
rest. u, ü to the rest. e & o are themselves asarüpa or asavanna to each oth- 
er and to the rest of vowels. These terms are to be regarded as formal gram- 
matical terms named in the sense that they are quite homogeneously compat- 
ible or interchangeable either as digha or rassa within themselves, not in the 
sense of similarity of the physical shape. 

!! Means sometimes or optionally, the function as prescribed in Sutta is inap- 
plicable at some instances due to lack of condition as outlined in Sutta. Also, 
Kvaci, Nava, và, vibhasa are words with the same meaning. All these 
Nipdta words mean optionally, or sometimes not applied in some instances. 
They are used by the grammarians to place restriction and limitation regard- 
ing the function of Sutta. It also means the function of Sutta is not applied 
in some instances. 


129 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


[SS] (a) Cattarotime 

Cattaro-four. ime-these. [Here, union occurs between “o and 
i". 

(b) Kinnu+ima-+eva (2 points of Sandhi in this example b.) Kin- 
nu-? ima-these nuns. eva-only. i.e. Are these only Bhikkhuni 
(female monks)? Aren't we? [Here, between “u and i" & “a and 
e", 

Kinnu-Kim-nu. [This combination of the Sabbanama noun “kim” 

and nipdta particle “nu” is equal to a question mark “?”. “m” 

changes into “n” by Sutta 31] 


[SM] Just elide or wipe out next vowels (a) i (b) i & e. That is it! 


Va’ti kasma? Why the word “Va” is included in Sutta? 
*Paficindriyani. *Taya'ssu dhamma jahita bhavanti. 
It is to show that the function of this rule is inapplicable 
in such instances as “Pafici’ndriyani, Taya'ssu dhamma 
jahità bhavanti etc." because it is restricted by “va” 
[CS] (a) * Pafici’ndriyani. 
(b) * Taya'ssu dhamma jahita bhavanti 
[SS] (a) * Paficatindriyani. Pafica-five. indriyani-faculties. 
(b) * Tayotassu dhamma jahita bhavanti. 
Tayo-three. assu-are. dhamma-defilements. jahita-removed. 
bhavanti-are. i.e. Three defilements are removed. 
(assu and bhavanti are two different verbs of the same meaning re- 
dundantly used). 


[SM] Elide the front vowels (a) a (b) o and then attach the front vowel-less 
consonants (a) c (b) y to the next i and a respectively. It is done. 


१४, १६. क्वचासवण्णं Sd 


14, 16. Kvaca'savannam lutte. 
[Kvacit+asavannam-+lutte. 3 words] 
[V] Saro kho paro pubbasare lutte kvaci asavannam pappoti. 


When the preceding vowel has been elided, the next one 
sometimes changes into asavanna Sara (a dissimilar vowel) 
which may be either an “e” or an “o”. [i or Pe , u or Wo] 


[CS] (a) Sankhyam ° no'peti vedagü. 


130 


[SS] 
[SM] 


Sandhi 


Sankhyam-to the state of being counted as a commoner. na-does 
not. upeti-reach. vedagü-The enlightened saint. i.e. The enlight- 
ened saint does not reach to the state of being counted as a com- 
mon worldling. 
(b) * Bandhusse'va samagamo. 
Bandhussa-of relative. iva-is like. samagamo-meeting. 
i.e. The meeting is like that (of seeing one's) relatives. 
(a) ° nat+upeti (b) ° Bandhussat+iva 
Just elide or wipe out the front vowels (a) a (b) a by Sutta 12. Then 
change (a) u into “0” (b) i into “e” by this Sutta. Then combine the 
front vowel-less consonants (a) n (b) s to next vowels “o” and “e” re- 
spectively. Now, it is done easily! 


Kvacr’ti kasma? 

Why there is the word *Kvaci" in Sutta? 

Yassi'ndriyani. Tathi’ pamarh dhammavaram adesayi. 

Itis to show that the function of this rule 1s inapplicable in 
the examples shown below as implied by the word "kvaci". 
* Yassi’ndriyani. * Tathü'pamam dhammavaram adesayi. 


[CS] 


[SS] 


[SM] 


(a) * Yassi’ndriyani. 

(b) * Tathü'pamam dhammavaram adesayi. 

(a) * Yassat+indriyani. 

(b) * Tatha+upamarm dhammavaram adesayi. 
Tatha-Like that. upamam-simile. dhammavararh-the noble 
Dhamma. adesayi- (Buddha) taught. i.e. Buddha taught the noble 
Dhamma resembling that simile. 

(a) This example previously explained in Sutta 12. 

(b) Elide the front vowel “a”. Then lengthen next “u” as *ü" by 
Sutta 15. Attach “th” to that “w’. It is done. 





१५, १७. दीघं 
15, 17 Digham. [Digharh. 1 word] 
[V] Saro kho paro pubbasare lutte kvaci digham pappoti. 


When the preceding vowel has been elided, the one behind 

is to be sometimes changed into a Digha-Sara, i.e. it is to be 
lengthened. [After the front vowel had been elided, the next one is to 
be lengthened into “9229, ।टा, u>u”] 


131 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


[CS] (a) ° Saddhi’dha vittam purisassa settham. 
Saddha-faith. idha-in this world. vittarh-is wealth. purisassa- 
for a person. settharh-the best. i.e. Faith is the best possession of 
a person in this world. 
(b) Anagarehi ° ci’ bhayatn. 
Anagarehi ca-with homeless persons, i.e. ascetics also. ubha- 
yarh-with both. 
[SS] (a) ° Saddha+idha (b) ° catubhayarn. 
[SM] Just elide or wipe out the front vowels (a) à (b) a by Sutta 12. Then 
lengthen (a) i into “T” (b) u into “0” by this Sutta. 
Then combine vowel-less front consonants (a) dh (b) c to the next 


[E 66m 99 


vowels 1” and “ū” respectively. It is thus done. 
Kvacr' ti kasma? 
Why there is the word “Kvaci” in Sutta? 
Itis to show that the function of this rule is inapplicable in 
examples shown below as restricted by *kvaci". 
* Paficahu'pali angehi samannagato. * Nattha'fifiam kifici. 
[CS] (a) * Paücahu'pali ahgehi samannagato. 
(b) * Nattha’ffiarh kifici 
[SS] (a) * Paücahi*upali angehi samannagato. 
Paficahi-by five. upali-Upali! angehi-factors. samannagato-the 
one who has. i.e. Upali! The one who has five factors. 
(b) * Natthirafifiar kifici 
Natthi-there is no. afifiarh-else, other. kifici-something. i.e. 
There is nothing else. 
[SM] For both examples (a & b), Elide the front vowels “i”. It is done. 


१६, १८. पुब्बो च 
16, 18. Pubbo ca. [Pubbo+ca. 2 words] 
[V] Pubbo ca saro parasaralope kate kvaci digharh pappoti. 


When the next (rear) vowel has been elided, the one in the 
front is sometimes made into a Digha-Sara, i.e. lengthened. 


[CS] (a)* Kimsü' dha vittarh purisassa settham. 
Kim su-what is. idha-in this world. vittarh-wealth. purisassa-for a 
person. settharh-the best. [su-is expletive, meaningless] i.e. What is 
the best asset for a person in this world? 


132 


[SS] 


Sandhi 


(b) * Sadhü'ti patissunitva. 

Sadhu-well. iti-thus. patissunitva-having replied, i.e. Having replied 
thus (by saying the word) “well”. 

(a) ° Kimsu-idha 

(b) ° Sadhutiti. 


[SM] Just elide or wipe out rear vowels (a) i (b) i by Sutta 12. Then 


[CS] 
[SS] 


lengthen both front (a) u (b) u into *ü" by this Sutta. It's done! 
Kvacr'ti kasma? 

Why there is the word *Kvaci" in Sutta? 

It is to show that the function of this rule is inapplicable 
in some examples shown below as restricted by “kvaci”. 
* Tti’ssa muhuttam'pi. 


* Tti’ssa muhuttam'pi (2 points of Sandhi) 


* Ttitassa muhuttarh+api. 
Iti-therefore. assa-for that monk. muhuttam-for a moment. 
api-even. 


[SM] For the first point, elide the next vowel “a” by Sutta 13. For the sec- 


१७, 
17, 


[V] 


ond point, elide “a” behind “m” by Sutta 40. Change “rh” into “m” 


by 31 and attach it to next “p”. It is done. 


१९, यमेदन्तस्सादेसो 


19. Ya’me’dantassa’deso. 
[Yarn+e-antassat+adeso. 3 words] 
E-karassa antabhütassa sare pare kvaci ya-kara’deso hoti. 


When a vowel follows (i.e. Present behind), the front vowel 


66.99 


e" sometimes changes into consonant “ya”. 

[This Sutta changes “e” into “y”. Usually, this “e” is part of 
“me-my, te-your, those, kirh-what, why” etc.,] 

Note: First study SS below before you read the translation of examples. 


[CS] (a) Adhigato kho * mya' yam dhammo. 


adhigato-realized, known. kho-really. me-by me. ayarh-this. 
dhammo-Dhamma. 
i.e. This Dhamma realized by me, in fact, (is very deep). 
(b) ° Tya'ham evam vadeyyam. 
Te-to you. aharn-I. evam-thus. vadeyyam-should say. 
i.e. If I should say thus to you. 


133 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


(c) * Tya'ssa pahina honti. 
Te-those defilements. assa-by that person (genitive case in nomi- 
native sense). pahina-being removed. honti-are. 
i.e. Those defilements are being removed by that person. 
[SS] (a)* Mya’yam > ° metayam, 
(b) ° Tya’ ham > ° teraham 
(c) ° Tya'ssa > ® tetassa 
[SM] Just change all *e" of (a) (b) (c) by this Sutta into *y". Then lengthen 
all next “a” of (a) (b) into an “a” by Sutta 15. Now, It becomes: 
(a) smy+ayarn, 
(b) ° ty+4ham 
Now, attach all the front newly morphed consonant *y" to next “a” 
and it is done. 
For example (c), no digha (lengthening of a into à) is necessary. Just 


6699 


attach “y” to next “a”. It is done. 
Kvacr’ti kasma? 
Why there is the word *Kvaci" in Sutta? 
It is to show that the function of this rule is inapplicable in 
the examples shown below as restricted by “kvaci”. 
* Ne’nagata. * Iti ne’ttha. 
[CS] (a) * Ne’nagata. 
(b) * Iti ne'ttha 
[SS] (a) * Netanagata. 
ne-those people. anagata-not coming.[natagata] 
i.e. Those people do not come. 
(b) * Iti na+ettha. 
iti-thus. na-not. ettha-here. 
[SM] For (a), Just elide next vowel *a" by Sutta 13. It is done. No need to 
attach anything here! 
For (b), elide front vowel “a” as per Sutta 12 and attach “n” to next 
“e”, It is quite simple and easy. 


१८, २०. वमोदुदन्तानं 


18, 20. Va’mo’du’dantanam. 
[Vamr-o, u, antanam. 2 words] 
[V] O-karu'karanam antabhütanam sare pare kvaci 
va-kara'deso hoti. 


134 


Sandhi 


When there is a vowel present behind, the front vowels “0 
or प” sometimes changes into the consonant “Va”. 


८८,,2१ 665499 


[This Sutta changes “0” or “u” into *v"] 


[CS] (a) Atha ° khva’ssa. 


[SS] 


(b) * Sva'ssa hoti. 

(c) * Bahva’badho. 

(d) * Vatthve'ttha vihitam niccam. 
Vatthu-location place. ettha-here. vihitarh-arranged. niccarh- 
always. i.e. A place is always arranged here. 

(e) ° Cakkhva'patha' magacchati. (Here Sandhi is at two points. 
So one extra function is necessary) 

(a) * Atha kho+assa. 
Atha kho-then. assa-of that person. 

(b) ° So+assa hoti. 
So-that. assa-of that person. hoti-is. 

(c) * Bahu+abadho. 
Bahu-much. abadho-disease. 

(d) ° Vatthu-ettha 

(e) ° Cakkhu-apatham--agacchati. (2 points of Sandhi in e) 
Cakkhu+apathamb-clear vision of wisdom eye. agacchati- 
comes. i.e. The clear vision of the wisdom eye comes. i.e. ap- 
pears. [Cakkhu-the eye-*apatharn-to a state of being vivid. i.e. 
clear vision] 


[SM] Just change all (a) o (b) o (c) u (d) u by this Sutta into *v". Now by 


Sutta 11, attach all the newly morphed consonant “v” to next (a) a 
(b) a (c) à (d) eand it is done. 


6617? 


For first point of (e), change “प” into *v" by this Sutta and attach it to 
next vowel. For the second point: change “m” into “m” by Sutta 34 
and attach the morphed “m” to next “a”. It is done. 
Kvacr' ti kasma? 
Why there is the word *Kvaci" in Sutta? 
Itis to show that the function of this rule 1s inapplicable in 
such instances of phrase examples as “* cattaro' me bhik- 
khave dhamma. * kinnuma’va samaniyo" etc. 


[CS] (a) * Cattaro' me bhikkhave dhamma. 


(b) * Kinnu’ma’va samaniyo. 


135 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


[SS] (a) * Cattaro+ime bhikkhave dhamma. 
(b) * Kinnut+ima’va samaniyo. 
[SM] These examples are already explained in Sutta 13. 


१९. २२. सब्बो चं ति 

19, 22. Sabbo cam ti. [Sabbo-cam-ti. 3 words] 

[V] Sabbo icce’so tisaddo byafijano sare pare kvaci ca-karam 
pappoti. 
The whole "ti" (which is part of ati, pati, iti upasagga par- 
ticles), sometimes changes into consonant “९”. 


(This “c” is reduplicated so that it becomes a conjunct consonant “ee” 
by Sutta 28) 


[CS] (a)*Icce'tam kusalam. (b) * Icca'ssa vacantyam. 
(c) ° Paccu'ttaritva. (d) ® Pacca’harati. 
[SS] (a) * Ititetarh kusalarh. 
Iti*etam-such this result. kusalarh-is good. 
(b) * Ititassa vacantyarm. 
Iti-thus. assa-should be. vacaniyarh-said. i.e. It should be said 
thus. 
(c) * Pati+uttaritva. 
Pati-uttaritva-having crossed again. [pati-again+ uttaritva- 
having crossed] 
(d) * Patit+aharati. 
Pati-aharati-(he) carries again. [pati-again+aharati-carries | 
[SM] Just change all “ti” of (a) (b) (c) (d) by this Sutta into “c”. Then dou- 
ble one more “c” to that morphed “c” by rule of Sutta 28. Then attach 
duplicated “ce” to next vowels. It is all done. 








Kvacr’ti kasma? 
Why there is the word “Kvaci” in Sutta? 
Itis to show that the function of this rule is inapplicable in 
examples shown below as restricted by “kvaci”. 
* [ti'ssa muhuttam’ pi. 
[CS] *Iti'ssa muhuttam’pi (Sandhi at two points) 
[SS] * Ititassa muhuttam-api 
[SM] Explained in Sutta 16. 


136 


Sandhi 


30, २७. दो धस्सच 
20, 27. Do dhassa ca. [Do+dhassa+ca. 3 words] 
[V] Dha-icce'tassa sare pare kvaci da-kara’ 0850 hoti. 


When a vowel follows, the front consonant “dha” some- 
times changes into a “da”. (The main function of this Sutta 
is changing one form of syllable into another form). 


[CS] ° Ekami'da' ham bhikkhave samayam. (2 points of Sandhi) 
Ekarh-one. ida-here. aham-I. bhikkhave-monks! samayarh-at a 
time. i.e. Monks! (While) I (was) here, at one time (once). 

[SS] * Ekarnt+idhat+aham 

[SM] (ist point of Sandhi solution) Change “th” into “m” by Sutta 34 and 
attach it to next “i”. 

(2nd point) Change “dh” into “0” by this Sutta. Then elide one front 


6699 


“a” by Sutta 12 and lengthen next “a” into “a” by Sutta 15 and attach 
“0” to that lengthened “a”. It’s done. 
Kvacr ti kasma? 
Why there is the word “Kvaci” in Sutta? 
It is to show that the function of this rule is inapplicable in 
some instances shown below as restricted by “kvaci”. 
* Tdhe’va maranam bhavissati. 
[CS] * Idhe’va maranam bhavissati. 
[SS] * Idha+eva maranam bhavissati. 
Idha-here. eva-only. maranam-death. bhavissati-shall be. 
i.e. My death shall be only here at this place! (I will not get up until 


you grant my wishes to become a monk, a request made by a son to 
his parents) 


[SM] Just elide the front vowel *a" as per Sutta 12 and attach *dh" to next 
“e”, It is done. 
Caggahanena dha-karassa ha-kara'deso hoti 
By means of the word “ca” the consonant “dha” sometimes 
changes into “ha”. 
[An additional sub-function applied by force of the word *ca?] 


[CS] *Sàa'hu dassana'mariyanam. 


137 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


[SS] ° Sa+dhu dassanarh+ariyanam. (Sandhi at two points) 
Sadhu-is good. dassanarh-even seeing or meeting. ariyanam-the 
noble saints. i.e. Even meeting saintly persons is good. 

[SM] Change “dh” into *h" by means of “ca”. For 2nd point, apply the 
function of Sutta 34 & 11 as shown before and it is done! 


Functions by “yogavibhaga” (the split-Sutta procedure) 


Suttavibhagena bahudha siya. 
By means of splitting multiple partial Suttas such as “To dassa 
ca" etc., other forms of various morphological changes are made 
possible. (See examples below shown in bold-letters. This sign > means it 
becomes. All examples are quite easy to understand. As a matter of fact, 
these examples are not Sandhi but a kind of word-form changes only) 
(1) To dassa, 
The consonant “d” is changed into “t”. 
yatha? for example, 
* Sugato-well-gone or the Buddha who speaks only the wholesome, 
beneficial and truthful words. [Su-well+gato-gone, uttered or said] 
* Sugato> Sugado. 
[SM] Just change “d” to “t”. Then morphological procedure for the word 
“sugato” as prescribed by this split-Sutta function is done. 
Note: No procedure of separation and combination of Sandhi is 
needed. The SM of subsequent examples are also the same. Just 
change into any syllable as required by the enjoined rules. 
(2) To tassa. 
The consonant "t" is changed into "t". 
yatha? ° Dukkatarh-a badly done deed. 
e.g., * Dukkatam- Dukkatam. [du-badly-katam-done, an im- 
proper act] 
(3) Dho tassa. 
The consonant "t" is changed into “dh”. 
yatha? * gandhabbo-a would-be being who is going to be conceived 
into a would-be mother's womb. 
e.g. * Gandhabbo> Gantabbo. [Gan-a derivative of gamu+tabba- 
a Kita affix] 


138 


Sandhi 


(4) Tro ttassa. 
The conjunct-consonant “tt” is changed into “tr”. 
yatha? * Atrajo-self-generated, the child born of oneself, one's own 
child. 
e.g., ° Atrajo> Attajo. [Atta-selft+jo-born of] 
(5) Ko gassa. 
The consonant “g” is changed into “k”. 
yatha? ° Kulüpako-the monk who always used to visit lay people's 
home. 
e.g., * Kulüpako» Kulüpago. [kula-family+upago-approacher] 
(6) Lo rassa. 
The consonant “r” is changed into "T". 
yatha? * Mahasalo-the one who has great wealth. 
e.g., * Mahasalo> Mahasaro. [Maha-great+saro-wealth] 


(7) Jo yassa. 
The consonant “y” is changed into “j”. 
yatha? * Gavajo-a kind of cattle raised in hilly regions or anything 
that is a product of cattle such as milk, ghee etc. 
e.g., * Gavajo> Gavayo. [Gava-cattlet+jo-born of, derived from]. 


(8) Bbo vvassa. 
The consonant “vv” is changed into “bb”. 
yatha? ° Kubbato-of the one who has done, of doer. 
e.g., ° Ku'bbato» Kuvvato. [Ku<derivative of kara+bbato<anta. 
See Sutta 127 for “to”] 
(9) Ko yassa. 
The consonant “y” is changed into “k”. 
yatha? ° Sake-of one's own. 
e.g., * Sake> Saye. 
(10) Yo jassa. 
The consonant “j” is changed into “y”. 
yatha? ° Niyamputtam-the child born of oneself. 
e.g., ° Niyamputtam»Nijamputtam 
(11) Ko tassa. 
The consonant "t" is changed into “k”. 


139 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


yatha? * niyako-permanent. 
e.g., * Niyako>Niyato. 

(12) Cco ttassa. 
The consonant “tt” is changed into “ee”. 
yatha? * Bhacco-wage-earning worker, the servant. 
e.g., * Bhacco>Bhatto. 


(13) Pho passa. 
The consonant “p” is changed into “ph”. 
yatha? ° Nipphatti-accomplishment, the act of finishing. 
e.g., * Nipphatti>Nipatti. 
(14) Kho kassa. 
The consonant “k” is changed into “kh”. 
yatha? ° Nikkhamati-(He) goes out, leaves. 
e.g., * Nikkhamati>Nikkamati. 
Change the last “k” into “kh”. It becomes Nikkhamati. 
Icceva'madi yojetabba. 
Other similar examples (like these shown here), should be ap- 
plied as per these rules. [The split-Sutta functions: 14] 


२१, २१. इवण्णो यं नवा 
21, 21. Ivanno yam nava. [Ivannotyarn+nava. 3 words] 
[V] Pubbo ivannoP? sare pare ya-kararh pappoti nava. 


When a vowel is present behind, the vowels of front 
consonants “i and T’ called *ivanna" sometimes morph into 


ज? 


consonant “ya”. [This Sutta changes “i or 1" into *y"] 


12 There are other names of vowels (except e & 0) named for the purpose of 
easy referencing in the matters of morphological procedures. They are: 

(1) avanna- a & à are called avanna (Homogenous vowels of “a’’) 

(2) ivanna= i & 1 are called ivanna (Homogenous vowels of 1") 

(3) uvanna- u & ü are called uvanna. (Homogenous vowels of “u”) 

It is a common morphological pattern of change that i & 1 used to change into 
“y”, while u & ū change into “v”. Please note this consistent pattern of 
change carefully. 


140 


Sandhi 


[CS] (a) * Patisantharavuttya'ssa. 
(b) Sabba + vittya' nubhüyate. 

[SS] (a)* Patisantharavutti+assa. 
patisantharavutti-diplomatically courteous. assa-(one) should 
be. i.e. (one) should be diplomatically courteous. (to avoid con- 
flict and maintain harmony) 


(b) ° vittitanubhiyate. 
Sabba-all. vitti-wealth. anubhüyate-is enjoyed. i.e. all the wealth 
is enjoyed. 
[SM] These examples will be explained in Sutta 41 later. 
Nava’ti kasma? 
Paficaha’ngehi samannagato. Muttacagi anu’ ddhato. 
Why is there the word “nava” in Sutta? 
It is to show that the function of this rule is inapplicable in 
such instances of phrase examples as “paficaha’ngehi sa- 
mannagato, muttacagi anu’ddhato” and so on as it is being 
restricted by the word “nava”. 
[CS] (a) * Paücaha'ngehi samannagato. 
(b) * Muttacagi anu’ ddhato 
[SS] (a) * Paficahitangehi samannagato. 


(b) * Muttacagi+anu’ ddhato. 
Muttacagi-the one who used to offer generously. anu'ddhato-is not 
restless, i.e. calm. 
i.e. The one who used to offer generously is calm with joy, not being 
restless. 

[SM] (a) Just elide the front vowel and attach “h” to next “a”. 
(b) Keep as pakati (i.e. as it 15). No specific function needed. 


33, २८. एवादिस्स रि पुब्बो च रस्सो 
22, 28. Eva’dissa ri pubbo ca rasso. 
[Eva-adissa+ri+pubbo+ca+trasso. 5 words] 
[V] Saramha parassa evassa e-karassa adissa rikaro hoti. 
Pubbo ca saro rasso hoti nava. 


The component vowel “e” of the nipata particle “eva” after 
the front vowel, changes into “ri” while the front vowel is 
also made into a “rassa” (i.e. shortened) sometimes. 


141 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


Summary: This Sutta changes “6” of “eva” into “ri” and 
also shortens the vowel in front of *eva". (2 Functions) 


[CS] (a)* Yatha’riva vasudhatalafi'ca sabbath. 
Yatha’riva-like, just as, vasudhatalaii'ca-the surface of the 
earth. sabbarh-all. [vasudha-earth. talarh-surface+ca-also] 
(b) * Tatha’riva gunava supüjaniyo. 
Tatha'riva-similarly in that manner. gunava-the virtuous one. 
supüjaniyo-is to be honored well. i.e. Just as all the surface of 
earth (is to be appreciated), so is the virtuous one to be honored. 
[SS] (a)* Yatha-eva (b) ° Tatha*eva 
[SM] For both examples, just change “e” into “ri” and shorten the front “a” 
into “a”. It is done. 
Nava'ti kasma? *Yatha eva. *Tatha eva. 
Why is there the word “nava” in Sutta? 
Itis to show that the function of this Sutta's rule is inappli- 
cable in such instances of phrase examples as “yatha eva, 
tatha eva" etc. (There is no Sandhi in the example. Hence, inapplica- 
ble. These words are already separate words). 


Iti sandhikappe dutiyo kando. 
The Second Section of Sandhi ends. 


142 


Sandhi 


Tatiya Kanda 
The Third Section 


33, २६. सरा पकति ब्यञ्जने 
23, 26. Sarà pakati byafjane. [Sara+pakati+byafijane. 3 words] 
[V] Sara kho byafijane pare pakatirüpani honti. 


When a consonant follows, the front vowel is to be kept as 
a “pakati (without applying any morphological function). 


Note: Withholding any specific function such as elision, changing into 
other word forms as prescribed in certain Suttas such as 12, 13, 14, 15, 
17, is called a “pakati sandhi" process. 

Why a “Pakati” procedure? 

Because it is totally unnecessary to have any Sandhi process lest it may 
corrupt the structural pattern of words or phrases. Thus keeps the proper 
meaning of the words. 

See examples carefully. Even though a next consonant is present in 
each examples shown by the side of a plus sign, there is no specific 
function of Sandhi applied on the front vowels. 


[CS] (a) " Mano’pubbangama dhamma. 
(b) * Pamado’maccuno padam. 
(c) Tinno’ parangato ahu. 
[SS] (a) * Mano+pubbangama dhamma. 
manopubbangama-are preceded by mind. dhamma-all mental 
states and physical actions. i.e. All mental states and physical 
phenomenon are preceded by the mind. 
(b) * Pamado--maccuno padam, 
Pamado-the carelessness. maccuno-of death. padam-is the cause. 
i.e. the carelessness is the cause of (repeated) death (in Samsara). 
(c) Tinno+parangato ahu. 
Tinno-the one who had crossed. parangato-the one who had 
gone to the other shore of safety and peace. ahu-was. 
i.e. (The enlightened saint) had crossed the ocean of suffering and 
had gone to the shore of Nibbana. 
[SM] For all examples (a-b-c), keep the vowel “०” 
performing any morphological procedure. 


as a “pakati, o" without 


143 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


२४, ३५. सरे क्वचि 
24, 35. Sare kvaci. [Saretkvaci. 2 words] 
[V] Sarà kho sare pare kvaci pakatirüpani honti. 


When a vowel follows, the front vowel is sometimes kept 
as a pakati (as an un-altered one). 


[CS] * Ko imam pathavim vicessati. 
[SS] *Ko-imam pathavim vicessati. 
Ko-who. imam-this. pathavim-earthly body. vicessati-will analyze 
(with insight knowledge) ? i.e. Who is going to analyze this earthly 
body with insight knowledge? 
[SM] Keep the front vowel “0” as a “pakati, o". No specific Sandhi proce- 
dure is applied on the front vowel “०” despite the presence of next 
vowel “i”. 
Kvacr’ti kasma? 
Why there is the word *Kvaci" in Sutta? 
Itis to show that the function of this rule is inapplicable in 
the examples shown below as restricted by the word 
“kvaci”. 
* Appassuta' yam puriso. 
[CS] * Appassuta' yam puriso 
[SS] * Appassuto+ayarh puriso 
Appassuto-is of less knowledge. ayam puriso-this person. 
i.e. This person is of less knowledge. 
[SM] Just elide the front vowel “o” and lengthen next vowel “a” into “a” 
by Sutta 15. Then attach the front consonant “t” to “a”. 
Note: The relevant Sutta for each relevant function is an easy guess 


work for a keen student. So sometimes it will be intentionally left un- 
explained. 


२५, ३७. दीघं 
25, 37 Digham. [Digharh. 1 word] 
[V] Sara kho byafijane pare kvaci digharh papponti. 


When a consonant follows, the front vowel is sometimes 
made into “digha”, i.e. lengthened. 


144 


Sandhi 


[CS] (a)* Samma dhammar vipassato. 

Samma-well or rightly. dhammarh-the Dhamma. vipassato-to 
the one who sees. 

(b) Evam game * muni care. 
Evarh-thus. game-in the village. muni-the wise monk. care- 
should conduct. i.e. The wise monk should thus conduct in the vil- 
lage (to the devotees without negatively affecting their faith or 
wealth) 

(c) * Khantr paramam tapo titikkha. 
Khantt-the practice of patience. paramarh-noble. tapo-is highest 
ethical virtue. titikkha-a spiritual quality called “titikkha”’. i.e. a 
spiritual quality called "titikkha", the practice of patience is the 
highest noble ethical virtue. 


[SS] (a) ० Samma+dhammarh 
(b) ° Muni+care. 
(c) ° Khantit+paramam 
[SM] Lengthen “a” of (a) into “a” and “i” of both (b) and (c) into “T” by 
this Sutta. It is done. 
Kvacr' ti kasma? 
Why is there the word “Kvaci” in Sutta? 
Itis to show that the function of this rule is inapplicable in 
examples shown below as restricted by “kvaci”. 
* [dha modati * Pecca modati. 
Idha-Here in this life. modati-(he) rejoices. 
Pecca-there in next life. modati-(he) rejoices. 
* Patiliyati. * Patihafifati. 
Patiliyati-(he) hesitates. Patihafifiati-(he) is stressed out or hurt. 
Note: No Sandhi procedure in * examples. This function 
OCCUIS: 
(1) where a convenient and easy recitation of a verse is re- 
quired, 
(2) and where exact metrical measure of a Pali verse (gatha) 
is needed to be maintained for the smooth versification. 


145 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


२६, ३८. रस्सं 
26, 38. Rassam. [Rassar. 1 word] 
[V] Sara kho byafijane pare kvaci rassam papponti. 


When a consonant follows, the front vowel is sometimes 

made into “rassa”, i.e. shortened. 

Note: This function occurs: 

(1) when preserving exact metrical measure in a Gatha 
(verse), 

(2) where a new syllable is inserted, 

(3) in the instances with conjunct-consonants. 


[CS] (a)* Bhovadi’nama so hoti. 
Bhovadi' nama-is called bhovadi. so-that person. hoti-is. 
i.e. That person is called Bhovadi-the one who used to say the 
term “bho”. 
(b) Yathabhavi’ gunena so. 
Yathabhavi-is called Yathabhavi. gunena-by virtue. so-that 
person. 


[SS] (a) * Bhovadi+nama 
(b) * Yathabhavi+gunena so. 
[SM] Shorten “T” of both (a) and (b) into “i” by this Sutta. It is done. 
Kvacr' ti kasma? 
Why is there the word *Kvaci" in Sutta? 
Itis to show that the function of this rule is inapplicable in 
such instances of phrase examples shown below as it is be- 
ing restricted by the word *kvaci". 
* Samma samadhi. * Savitti chandaso mukham. 
* Upaniyati jivita’ mappa'mayu. 
[CS] (a) * Sammasamadhi. 
(b) * Savittt chandaso mukham. 
(c) * Upaniyati jivita' mappa'maàyu. 
[SS] (a) * Samma+samadhi-the right concentration. 
(b) * Savitti+chandaso mukhath. 


Savitti-the verse addressed to “Savitri-the sun god". chandaso-of 
Vedic hymns. mukharh-(is) the beginning. i.e. the verse ad- 


146 


Sandhi 


LEES 


dressed to "savitri 
62, 10). 
(c) * Upantyati jivitam--appam-ayu 
Upaniyati-is brought nearer (to death). jivitam-life. appar- 
short. ayu-age. i.e. Short life and age (of living beings) is brought 
nearer (to death day by day). 
[SM] No rassa function for vowels a, & 1 in (a-b) before plus 
sign. 
There is Sandhi in non-example words “jivitarh+apparhtayu”. 
[SM] Just change both “th” into “m” by 34 and attach it to next vowels. 


is the beginning of vedic hymns (Rig veda III, 


Note: This function of Sutta occurs: 

(1) when preserving exact metrical measure in prosody, 

(2) where a new syllable is being inserted, 

(3) in the words with conjunct-consonants. 

See the examples shown in order of point of occurrence. Please see 

the underlined short vowels which are made into a Rassa (shortened 

vowel). 

(1) Bhovadi Nama So Hoti (Here “i” is intentionally shortened 
to preserve the metrical measure of the verse) 

(2) Samma’ dakkhato [Samma+akkhato] (Here “a” is inten- 
tionally shortened due to an inserted syllable “d’’) 

(3) Parakkamo [Para+kamo] (Here “a” is intentionally short- 
ened due to the conjunct-consonants “kk’’) 


२७, ३९. लोपञ्च तत्राकारो 
PA 39 Lopan’ca tatra’karo [Loparh+ca+tatra+a-karo. 4 words] 
[V] Sara kho byafijane pare kvaci lopam papponti. 
Tatra ca lope kate a-kara'gamo hoti. 
When a consonant is present behind, the front vowel is 
sometimes elided. In place of the elided vowel, an “a” is in- 
serted to replace it. [See SS before reading translations] 
[CS] (a)*Sa silava. 
So-that person. silava-(is) virtuous. 
(b) * Sa pafifiava. 
So-that person. pafifiava-(is) wise. 


147 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


(c) * Esa dhammo sanantano. 
Eso-this. dhammo-Dhamma. sanantano-is ancient. i.e. This is 
ancient Dhamma. 
(d) ° Sa ve kasava'marahati. 
So-that person. ve-in fact. kasavarh-the robe. arahati-deserves 
(to wear). i.e. That person indeed deserves to wear the robes. 
(e) * Sa manakamo’pi bhaveyya. 
So-that person. manakamo'pi-desirous of admiration. bhaveyya- 
should be. 
(f) * Sa ve muni jatibhayam adassi. 
So. ve-indeed. muni-sage, monk. jatibhayarh-the danger of re- 
birth. adassi-saw. i.e. That sage saw the danger of rebirth. 

[SS] (a)*So-silava. (b) ° So*pafifiava. 

(c) ° Eso+dhammo 

(d) * Sot+ve kasavamc-arahati. 

(e) * Sotmanakamo’pi bhaveyya. 
(f) ° So+ve muni jatibhayam adassi. 

[SM] Just elide *o" of all examples and insert “a” in its place. It is done. 
In (d) Sandhi is at two points. In 2nd point, just change “th” into “m” 
by 34. 

Kvacr’ti kasma? 

Why is there the word *Kvaci" in Sutta? 

It is to show that the function of this rule is inapplicable in 
some examples shown below as implied by the word 
“kvaci”. 

* So muni-that monk. 

* Eso dhammo padissati. 

Eso dhammo-That Dhamma. padissati-is clearly seen (that Dhamma is 
seen clearly). 

* Na so kasava'marahati. 

Na-does not. so-that person. kasavam-the robe. arahati-deserves (to 
wear). i.e. That person does not deserve (to wear) the robe. 





Note: There is no Sandhi process occurred in the examples 
except in the non-example word “kasava’ marahati”. 

[SS] Kaàsavam-arahati. 

[SM] Just change “th” into “m” and attach it to the next vowel “a” by 34. 


148 


Sandhi 


२८, ४०. पर द्वेभावो ठाने 
28, 40. Para dvebhavo thane. [Parat+dvebhavo+thane. 3 words] 
[V] Saramha parassa byafijanassa dvebhavo hoti thane. 


The consonant after the front vowel is to be reduplicated by 
adding a similar consonant to it wherever appropriate and 
applicable. 

[See the examples below carefully as said in the Vutti of Sutta. There is 
a vowel before the apostrophe and plus signs. The consonant behind it 
is to be reduplicated] 


[CS] (a) * Idha’ppamado purisassa jantuno. 


[SS] 


(b) ° Pa’bbajjarh kittayissami. 

(c) ° Catu’ddasim. 

(d) * Pafica' ddasim. 

(e) ° Abhi' kkantataro cando. 

(a) ° Idhat+pamado purisassa jantuno. 
Idha-in this world. pamado-lack of diligence, carelessness. puri- 
sassa-of a person. jantuno-of a being. i.e. In this world, the care- 
lessness of a person, a living being. 

(b) ° Pat+bajjarh kittayissami. 
Pabajjam-the monkhood. kittayissami-(I) shall announce. 

(c) ° Catu--dasim. 
Catudasim-on the the fourteenth day. 

(d) ° Pafica+dasith. 
Paficadasirh-on the fifteenth day. 

(e) * Abhi+kantataro cando. 
Abhikantataro-is more beautiful. cando-the moon. 
[Abhi-specially.+ kanta-beautiful+taro-more] i.e. The moon is 
more beautiful on the 14" and 15" days. 
[Examples c, d, e are translated together in the same context. | 


[SM] Just reduplicate similar consonants of each example shown in bold- 


faced letters. It is done. 


Thane’ti kasma? 

Why is there the word “thane” in Sutta? 

Itis to show that the function of this rule is inapplicable in 
some instances as shown below as they are not the right 
point for reduplication procedure. 


149 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


* [dha modati, * Pecca modati. (Refer to Sutta 25) 
Note: No Sandhi process in these examples. 


Table of Reduplication with Similar Consonants. 
The Consonants eligible for homogenous reduplication process 
by the rule of this Sutta No. 28, are shown in order of their own grouping. 
























































Vagga The The The The fourth | The fifth 
Groups first second | third 
Ka-group k+k>kk N/A gtg^gg N/A N/A 
Ca-group ctc>ee N/A PP ii N/A i-i ññ 
Ta-group | Hett | N/A | d*d»dd | — N/A n+ nnn 
Ta-group trt^tt N/A d+d>dd N/A ntn»nn 
Pa-group ptp>pp N/A b+b>bb N/A m-m»mm 
Non-Vagga | y+y>yy N/A HT v+v>vv>bb sts>ss 
y. r,l, ४, ७ | “r, ļ and h” are inapplicable for reduplication. Though v+v 
h, |, are augmented as “vy”, it usually further changes as “bb”. 





२९, ४२. वग्गे घोसाघोसानं ततियपठमा 
29, 42. Vagge ghosa'ghosanam tatiya, pathama. 
[Vagge+ghosa, aghosanarh+tatiya, pathama. 3 words] 
[V] Vagge kho pubbesam byafijananam ghosa’ ghosabhitanam 
saramha yathasankhyam tatiya, pathama’kkhara dvebhavam 
gacchanti thane. 


To vagga group consonants which may be either ghosa (i.e. 
the second) or aghosa (i.e. the fourth) following a vowel, a redu- 
plication process is to be carried out by adding the dissimilar 
consonants of either the first (to the second) or the third (to the 
fourth) from the same vagga group respectively wherever ap- 
plicable. 
Note: Even though it is categorically said as "ghosa’ghosabhitanam" in Vutti, not 
all ghosa or aghosa are eligible to be the candidate (i.e. the base word) for reduplica- 
tion. The eligible ghosa is only the second and the aghosa eligible to be reduplicated 
is the fourth one. This Sutta enjoins to reduplicate the second ghosa with the first of 
the same vagga group while the fourth is to be reduplicated with the third. Note that 
non-vagga ghosa and aghosa are inapplicable. Please refer to Sutta 7 & 9 regarding 


Vagga and ghosa or aghosa. Normally, the procedure of this Sutta is quite challenging 
to understand without a more simplified explanation and elucidation. The wording 


150 





Sandhi 


structure of the Sutta itself seems a bit misplaced. If Sutta is structured as "Vagge 
ghosa'ghosanam pathama, tatiya", it could be more simple to understand its meaning 
for the students. 


Method: 

(1) If the candidate base word is the second in Vagga group, then, the first 
dissimilar letter from the same group is to be added to it. 

(2) If the fourth is the candidate base word, then the third from the group is 
to be added to it. See all the examples and accompanying tables. 


Table of Reduplication with Dissimilar Consonants 
(Only the second and the fourth consonants are to be reduplicated) 
































Vagga Ghosa (aspirated) Aghosa (Unaspirated) 
Group The The Second The The Fourth The 
First Base syllable Third Base syllable Fifth 
(shown in bold) (shown in old) 
Ka-group K- K+kha=kkha G- G+gha=ggha n/a 
Ca-group C> C+cha=ccha J> J+Jha=jjha n/a 
Ta-group T> T+tha=ttha D> D+dha=ddha n/a 
Ta-group T> T+tha=ttha D> D+dha=ddha n/a 
Pa-group P> P+pha=ppha B> B+bha=bbha n/a 




















Ghosa-group Reduplication Table 


























Vagga Ghosa Examples 
The first | The second (Drawn from Pali texts) 
Ka-vagga | k> +kh nakkhamati-(he) dislikes[nat+khamati] 
Ca-group c> +ch ducchannam-badly covered [du+channarh] 
Ta-group | t> +th adhitthati-(it) stands firmly [adhi+thati] 
Ta-group | t> +th vitthareti-(it) expands [vitthareti] 
Pa-group | p> +ph nipphalam-without result [ni*phalam] 




















Aghosa-group Reduplication Table 






































Vagga Aghosa Examples 
Thethird | The fourth (Drawn from Pali texts) 
Ka-vagga | g> +gh paggharati-(it) drips.[pat+gharati ] 
Ca-group | J> tjh ujjhayanti-(they) complain. [u+jhayanti] 
Ta-group d> +dh *vaddheti-(it) grows.[vadheti] 
(The examples are rare in this group) 
Ta-group 102 +dh niddhareti-(he) carries out.[ni+dhareti] 
Pa-group | b> +bh vibbhamati-(it) totters.[vitbhamati] 








151 





Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


Note: The Sandhi applicable by the rule of this Sutta usually 
used to occur mostly in the individual words prefixed with 
upasagga particles though it also occurs occasionally in the un- 
ion of two different words like those cited in the Sutta below. 


The examples of Sutta (these examples are at the union of two words) : 


[CS] 


[SS] 


[SM] 


(a) Ese’va ० caj'jhanapphalo. 

(b) ° Yatrat'thitam nappasaheyya maccu. 

(c) Sele yatha ° pabbatamuddhani t'thito. 

(d) ° Cattari t'thanàni naro pamatto. 

(a) Eseva ° cat+jhanapphalo. 
Ese'va ca-only this. jhanapphalo-is the result of Jhanas. i.e. Only 
this is the result of Jhanas (deep mental absorption states). 

(b) ° Yatrat+thitam nappasaheyya maccu. 
Yatra-where. thitarh-to the one standing. na’ppasaheyya-would 
not overwhelm. maccu-death. i.e. A place where death cannot 
overwhelm. 

(c) Sele yatha * pabbatamuddhani+thito. 
Sele-rocky. yatha-like. pabbatamuddhani-on top of mountain. 
thito-standing. i.e. Like the one standing on top of the rocky 
mountain (can see things below clearly) 

(d) * Cattari+thanani naro pamatto. 
Cattari-the four. thanani-points. naro-man. pamatto-being igno- 
rant of. i.e. The man who is ignorant of the four points. 

For (a) add dissimilar “j” to “jh”. [Here “jha” is the fourth in Vag- 

ga. Therefore, “j”, the third becomes its reduplicate] 

For (b) add "t" to “th” for (b) (c) and (d). [Here, “tha” is the second 

in Vagga. So “t”, the first is its reduplicate] 

[See both the front and rear letters carefully as shown in bold-faced 

letters. Check what kind of dissimilar letter is to be reduplicated in 

each example.] 


Thane’ti kasma? 

Why is there the word “thane” in Sutta? 

It is to show that the function of this rule is inapplicable in 
the example shown below as it is not the due place for this 
rule. 


* 


Idha cetaso dalharh ganhati thamasa. 


Idha-in this noble teaching of Budda. cetaso-of the mind. dalharn- 


152 


Sandhi 


firmly. ganhati-holds or focuses. thamasa-by power of. i.e. In this no- 
ble teaching of Buddha, (The disciple who is committed) firmly holds 
his (object of meditation) by power of the concentrated mind. 
[CS] * Idha cetaso 
[SM] The function of this Sutta is inapplicable as it is not the due point. 
(“thana-means due point") 


Iti sandhikappe tatiyo kando. 
The Third Section of Sandhi ends. 


153 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


Catuttha Kanda 
The Fourth Section 


3o, ५८. अं ब्यञ्जने निग्गहितं 

30, 58. Am byafijane niggahitam 
[Am-byafijane*tniggahitam. 3] 

[V] Niggahitam? kho byafijane pare ar-iti hoti. 


When a consonant follows, [i.e. presents behind] the “nig- 
gahita-m" in the front changes into am. [See the footnote.] 


[CS] (a)* Evam'vutte. 

(b) * Tam'sadhü'ti patissunitva. (Sandhi at 2 points in this ex- 
ample) 

[SS] (a)* Evam-vutte. 

Evarh-thus. vutte-(when) said. i.e. When thus said. 

(b) ° Tarh+sadhu+iti patissunitva. 

Tari-to that said word of Buddha. sadhu iti- “Well Sir! (replying) 
thus. patissunitva-having accepted and replied. i.e. Having replied to 
Buddha's call by saying “Well, Venerable Sir!". 

[SM] For (a), by this Sutta, change “th” into “arn”. Now, it will look like 
this: [° Eva+arh+vutte.] Elide the “a” of “eva”. Now, it will look like 
this: [° Ev+arh+vutte.]. It is done. 

For (b) the first point of Sandhi, by this Sutta, change “m” into “am”. 
Now, it will look like this: [° Ta+arn+sadhutiti patissunitva] 

Elide the front “a” of “Ta”. Now, it will look like this: 

[° T+arh+sadhutiti patissunitva]. 

For the second point of Sandhi, elide the next vowel “i” by Sutta 13 
and lengthen the front “u” into “a” by Sutta 16. 


'3 This Sutta keeps the niggahita represented by a dot as it is without chang- 
ing it into any word-form. SM is actually not necessary but shown in view of 
*Rüpasiddhi" which said: Saralopo ‘ti adina pubbasaralopo va. 

Though the function of the Sutta seems redundant, it has to be assumed as a 
matter of the grammatical principle and necessity which prevents any kind of 
morphological alteration of an independent niggahita in singular, accusative 
case. In such cases, it usually plays either as an adverb or an object etc., in a 
sentence. 


154 


Sandhi 


Now, it will be combined in Sandhi like this: [* Tarn sadhüti patis- 
sunitva]. It is done. 


32. ४९. वग्गन्तं वा वग्गे 
31, 49. Vagga’ntam và vagge 
[Vagga-antarn+va+vagge. 3 words] 
[V] Vaggabhüte byafijane pare niggahitam kho vaggantam va 
pappoti. 


When a consonant belonging to a specific vagga group fol- 
lows (i.e. is present behind), the *niggahita-m" in front is to 
be sometimes changed into the last consonant of that vagga 
group accordingly. 
Summary: This Sutta enjoins to change so-called Niggahi- 
ta ^m" into ^n, fi, n, n, m" depending on the next letter of 
relevant Vagga-groups it precedes. The five consonants “hi, ñ, n, 
n, m" are called *Vagganta-the end-consonants of the Vagga-group, or 
nasal stops". [Refer to Sutta 7 to clearly understand this function.] 
Here is how the rule of this Sutta is to be applied: 
(a) If “th” precedes one of k, kh, g, gh then it will be changed 
into n". 
(b) If “m” precedes one of c, ch, j, jh then it will be changed into 
"fü". 
(c) If “th” precedes one of t, th, d, dh then it will be changed into 
“p”. 
(d) If “m” precedes one of t, th, d, dh,*n then it will be changed 
into “n”. 
(e) If “th” precedes one of p, ph, b, bh, m then it will be changed 
into “m”. 
Note: The anomalous examples where *n constitute as the end-syllable of 
Vagga are also found in some Pali texts such as "tan? niccutam, Kinnu” etc. 
In this grammar text, in Sutta No. 573, Sa'disanta puccha, bhanja, hansa'dihi 
ttho, ^hansadihi" is an anomalous Sandhi-form where a non-vagga “s” is 
preceded by “m”. Without such Sandhi being applied, it should be 
*hamsadihi-from the root harhsa etc,". 


[CS] (a)* Tan’niccutam. Here “rh” precedes “n”. 


155 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


[SS] 


[SM] 


(b) * Dhammafi'care sucaritam. Here “th” precedes “c”, so it 


eem 


becomes “ñ 
(c) * Cirap’pavasim purisam. Here “th” precedes “p”, so it be- 
comes “m”. 
(d) * Santan' tassa manam hoti. Here “th” precedes “t”, so it be- 
comes “n”. 
(e) ° Tan" karunikam. Here “rh” precedes ^k", so it becomes ^n". 
(f) ° Evan? kho bhikkhave sikkhitabbarh. Here “m” precedes 
“kh”, hence it becomes “ñ”. 
Note: Though the Sutta enjoins to change “m” into the end-syllables 
“पी, ñ, n, n, m”, there are some anomalous examples such as the 
example (c). 
See the points of Sandhi in these examples shown in bold-faced two 
letters. Check which Vagga group the next letter belongs to. The so- 
lution as to which letter is to become the morpheme of the front nig- 
gahita will be quite easy to understand. 
(a) ° Tam-niccutam. 
Tarh-That Nibbana. niccutam-is without change 
[Ni-without--cuta-death or change] 
(b) ° Dhammam-care sucaritam. 
Dhammam-the Dhamma. care-(one) should practice. sucaritarh- 
by being well-practiced. i.e. One should practice Dhamma well, 
(not half-heartedly nor sporadically but with consistent effort). 
(c) * Cirarh+pavasim purisam. 
Cirarh-for long. pavasith-used to be living abroad. purisarm-to 
the person. i.e. To the person who used to live in other lands for 
long (when he safely returns, both family and friends warmly 
welcome him). 
(d) * Santarh+tassa manam hoti. 
Santarh-calm. tassa-of that person. manam-mind. hoti-is. i.e. 
The mind of that person (who progressed in meditation) is calm. 
(e) ° Tarh+karunikath. 
Tam-to that. karunikam-compassionate Buddha. 
(f) ° Evarh+kho bhikkhave. 
Evam kho-thus. bhikkhave-monks! 
For example (a), change “rh” into “n”. For (b) change into “ñ”, For 
(c) change into “m”, this “m” is to be changed into “p” by means of 
“Ca” in Sutta 35. If directly changes into “p” by this Sutta alone, it 
will contravene the injunction of this Sutta. For (d) change into “n”, 


156 


[CS] 
[SM] 


[CS] 


[SS] 


Sandhi 


For (e-f), change into "n". 
Vaggahanena niggahitam kho la-karadeso hoti. 
By the word “va” included in this Sutta, the niggahita 


changes into consonant “I”. 


e Puggalarh-to an individual. [SS] Puggarht+arm 
Change the front “arh” into "I" and attach it to next “a”. It is done. 


Va’ti kasma? 

Why is there the word “vā” in Sutta? 

It is to show that the function of this rule is inapplicable 
in the examples shown below as restricted by “va”. 

* Na tam kammar katam sadhu. 

Na-not. tarh-that. kammarh-deed. katam-which is done. sadhu- 
good. i.e. that (anwholesome) deed which has been done is not good. 
* Na tam-kammam katam sadhu. [SM] No Sandhi function. 


TABLE OF VAGGANTA-FUNCTION 


This table explains how “th” is to be systematically morphed into the 
respective end-consonants of vagga. 





















































Vagga The first The second The third The fourth 
Group 
Ka | mtka>nka tht+kha>nkha | mt+ga>nga th+gha>ngha 
group |Tankarunikam | Tankhanam | Sangaho Sanghato 
Ca | mtca>fica m+cha>ñcha | rh+ja>fija m+jha>ñjha 
group |Tañca [tarh+ca] | Safichanno Sanjanati * Sanjhayati 
[Sarh+channo] |[Sam+jānāti] [Sarh+jhayati] 
Ta | mtta>nta th+tha>ntha th+da>nda m-tdha»ndha 
group |No examples Santhati * Sandahati — |No examples 
found in the texts [Sarh+thati] — [Sam--dahàti] found though it is 
though applicable | : applicable. 
by the rule. 
Ta | mtta>nta th+tha>ntha | mt+da>nda m-tdha»ndha 
group | Santussati Santharo Sanditthiko Jutindharo 
[Sarh+tussati] [Sarh+tharo] |[Sarh+ditthiko] |[Jutirh+dharo] 
Pa | mt+tpa>mpa th+pha>mpha | mt+ba>mba m-tbha»mbha 
group | Sampatto Tamphalam |Sambodho Sambhujjhati 
[Sarh+patto] [Tarh+phalarh] |[Sarnt+bodho] [Sarh+bhujjhati] 

















Note: The example shown with * mark are not frequently found in the majority of Pali texts. 





157 





Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


३२, 


५०. एहे ञं 


32, 50 E,he fiam [E-he+fiarh. 2 words] 


[V] 


E-kara, ha-kare pare niggahitam kho fia-kararh pappoti va. 


When either vowel “e” or consonant “h” are present behind, 
the "niggahita-m" in front sometimes changes into “ñ”. 
[See “e” is behind in the examples a, b. “h” is behind in c, 
५] 


[CS] (a) ° Paccattafi'fieva parinibbayissami. 


[SS] 


Paccattaii’feva-by oneself. parinibbayissami-(I) will enter into 
Nibbanic peace by oneself. 

(b) ° Tañ’ fieve'ttha patipucchissami. 
Tari’fieva-only to you. ettha-here. patipucchissami-(I) will re- 
question. i.e. I will question you again in this matter. 

(c) ° Evafi’hi vo bhikkhave sikkhitabbam. 
Evafi’hi-only thus. vo-by you. bhikkhave-monks! sikkhitab- 
barh-should train. i.e. You should thus train (practice). 

(d) * Tarihi tassa musa hoti. 
Tari’hi-that word. tassa-of that person. musa-wrong. hoti-is. 
i.e. His word is wrong. 

(a) ° Paccattarh+eva. 

(b) * Tarh+evettha. (e of a nipata word “eva” is present in these 
examples) 

(c) ° Evam--hi. 

(d) ° Tam-hi. (h of a nipáta word “hi” is present in these exam- 
ples) 





[SM] For (a) (b), change “th” of all examples into one single “fi” and re- 


double it by Sutta 28. Then attach the double “fifi” to next respective 
vowels. 
For (c) (d), just change “m” into “ñ” and attach it to next consonant 
“h”. It is done. 

Va’ti kasma? 

Why is there the word “va” in Sutta? 

Itis to show that the function of this rule is inapplicable in 


95 


some instances shown below as restricted by the word “vā”. 


[CS] * Eva'metam abhiüfiaya, *Evam hoti subhasitarh. 


Evam-thus. etarh-that Dhamma. abhififiaya-having known. Evarh- 


158 


Sandhi 


thus. hoti-is. subhasitarh-well-said. i.e. Having known that Dhamma 
thus, (the word thus said) is well-said. 


[SS] *(a) Evam-*etam (b) *Evam hoti 
[SM] (a) Change “th” into *m" by 34 and attach it to the next vowel. It is 
done. (b) Same as in example "evarh vutte" at Sutta 30. 


33. ५०.सयेच 

33, 50. Sa ye Ca [Satyetca. 3 words] 

[V] Niggahitam kho ya-kare pare saha ya-karena fiakaram 
pappoti và. 


When consonant “ya” follows, the “niggahita-rh” in front, 
along with “ya”, sometimes changes into “ñ”. 


[CS] (a) ° Safi'fiogo-joined together. (b) ° Saf’ fiuttam-conjoined. 

[SS] (a)*Samryogo (b) ° Sarhtyuttarh. 

[SM] Change “th” together with “y” as prescribed by Sutta into one single 
“ñ”. Reduplicate it by 28 and attach to respective vowels “o and u” of 
each example. It is done. 

Va’ti kasma? 

Why is there the word “va” in Sutta? 

Itis to show that the function of this rule is inapplicable in 
some instances shown below as restricted by “va”. 

* Samyogo. * Samyuttam. 

[SM] No Sandhi in these examples. That is why there is an “m” still re- 
maining intact without changing into any specific word-form. 


३४, ५२. मदा सरे 

34, 52. Ma,da sare [Ma, datsare. 2 words] 

[V] Niggahitassa kho sare pare ma-kara, da-kara'desa 
honti và. 


When a vowel is present behind, the "niggahita-m" in front 
is to be sometimes changed into consonants “m or d". 
[CS] (a)* Ta'maham brümi brahmanam. 
(b) * Eta' davoca sattha. 
[SS] (a)* Tarh+aham brümi brahmanam. 


159 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


Tam-to that person. aham-I. brümi-declare. brahmanarh-as 
Brahmana. i.e. I say that person as a Brahmin (the one who have 
had removed sins. i.e. saint). 

(b) ° Etarh+avoca sattha. 
Etam-this. avoca-said. sattha-Lord Buddha. i.e. Lord Buddha 
said this discourse. 


[SM] (a) Change “m” into “m” (b) into “d”. Then attach those “m” and “त” 
to next vowels. Then they become perfectly combined words in the 
Sandhi. 

Va’ti kasma? 
Why is there the word “va” in Sutta? 
Itis to show that the function of this rule 1s inapplicable in 
examples shown below as it is restricted by the word “va”. 
*Akkocchi mam, *avadhi mam, *ajini mam, *ahasi me. (Re: 
Sutta 11) 

[SM] No Sandhi process occurred in these examples. 


३५, ३४. यवमदनतरला चागमा 
35, 34. Ya,va,ma,da,na,ta,ra,la ca’gama 
[Ya, va, ma, da, na, ta, ra, latcatagama. 3 words] 
[V] Sare pare yakaro vakaro makaro dakaro nakaro takaro 
rakaro lakaro ime agama honti va. 


The consonants “y, v, m, d, n, t, r, P’ are sometimes to be 
inserted when a vowel is present behind (i.e. follows). 

See the examples below where the consonants to be inserted are clearly 
shown in brackets. The points to be inserted are behind the + plus sign, 
right in front of the vowels in each example. 


SM is quite simple for these examples except a few. 
[y] * Na’yimassa vijja> [ss] Nat+imassa vijja. 
Na-not. imassa-of this person. vijja-knowledge. 
i.e. There is no knowledge in this person. 
[SM] Insert “y” in front of “i” and it is done. 
e Yatha'yidam cittam- Yatha idam cittam. 
Yatha-like. idam cittarn-this mind. 
[SM] Insert “y” in front of “i” and shorten the front “a” into “a” by 
Sutta 26. 


160 


[v] 


Sandhi 


Migi bhanta * vudikkhati> udikkhati. 


Migi bhanta ° udikkhati. 
Migi-female-deer. bhanta-being shaken. udikkhati-looks. 
i.e. The female deer looks shaken. 


[m] Sitta te ° lahu’messati.> lahu+essati. 


[d] 


Sitta-the boat with water being thrown out or removed. te-your. lahu- 
quickly. essati-will move. 

i.e. With the seeped water being taken out, your boat will move fast. 
Asitta te * garu'messati^ garu-essati 

Asitta-the boat with water not being thrown out. te-your. garu-heavily. 
essati-will move. i.e. With the seeped water not taken out, your boat 
will move heavily. 

Asso bhadro * kasa' miva» kasa’+iva 

Asso-the horse. bhadro-good. kasa iva-(keeps off) from goading stick. 
i.e. A good horse keeps off the goading stick (It does not need to be hit 
with a whipping stick). 

e Samma’ dana vimuttanarh> ° Sammā+aññā 

Samma-well. afifia-having known. vimuttanarh-of those liberated. 


[SM] Shorten the front “a” into “a” by Sutta 26 after “d” is inserted and 


attached to next vowel. 

e Manasa’danna vimuttanam> Manasa-afifia 

Manasa-by mind. afifia-having known. vimuttanarh-of those liber- 
ated. [SM same as before] 

e Atta’dattha’mabhififiaya> ° Attat+attham-+abhifnaya 

(2 points of Sandhi) 

Atta attham-the well-being of oneself. abhififiaya-having known. 
i.e. knowing one's wellbeing, (one should care about one's own busi- 
ness). 


[SM] Insert *d" at the first point and attach it to next vowel. Then at second 


point, change the front “th” into “m” by 31 and attach it to the next 
vowel. 


[n] ° Cirarh’nayati> ciram ayati. ° Ito’nayati> ito ayati. 


[t] 


Cirarh-after a long time. ayati-(he) comes. Ito-from here. ayati-(he) 
comes. 

e nayati>ayati. (Both are the same, insert “n” before a) 

* Yasma'tiha bhikkhave> Yasma’+iha bhikkhave 
Yasma-for which reason. iha-in this world. bhikkhave-monks! 

° Tasma’tiha bhikkhave> Tasma’+iha bhikkhave 


(Both examples are the same) 


161 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


[r] 


[]] 


Tasma-for that reason. iha-in this world. bhikkhave-monks! 
e Ajja tagge panupetarh> Ajjat+agge 
Ajja-today. agge-starting from. panupetam-for life. 
i.e. Starting today for life (I take refuge in Buddha). 
e Sabbhi’reva samasetha> Sabbhi+eva samasetha. 
Sabbhi-with saints. eva-only. samasetha-(one) should associate. 
e Aragge' riva» Araggetiva-is like on the edge of wood-chisel. 
sasapo-the mustard seed. (i.e. like a mustard seed placed on the edge 
of achisel can easily fall). 
Aragga-from the edge of chisel. ® Sasapo’riva> Sasapotiva-like 
a fallen mustard seed. (both are the same in matters of function, just in- 
sert “r” before 1”) 
° Cha’ labhinna> Cha-abhififia-six psychic powers. 
(Insert “]”. Note that both “T”? and *T" are the same) 
e Sa’layatanarh> Cha-ayatanam-asix sense-bases. 
(In this example, after "I" is inserted, change “cha” into “sa” by Sutta 
374.) 
Va'ti kasma? 
Why is there the word “va” in Sutta? 
Itis to show that the function of this Sutta is inapplicable in 
some instances shown below as it is restricted by the word 
“va”. 
* Evam mahiddhiya esa. 
Evam-thus. mahiddhiya-is of great power. esa-This condition of hav- 
ing wholesome deeds. 
i.e. This condition of having wholesome deeds is thus of great power. 
* Akkocchi mam, avadhi mam, ajini mam, ahasi me. 

(Re: Sutta 11) 
* ajeyyo anugamiko. 
ajeyyo-unconquered by enemies. anugamiko-something which accom- 
panies. 





Caggahanena idhe'va ma-karassa pa-karo hoti. 
By means of the word “ca” in Sutta, the consonant “m” is 


66,499 


changed into “p”. 


[CS] ° Cirap’pavasim purisam 
[SS] Ciram-*pavasim purisam (Re Sutta 31) 


162 


[SM] 


Sandhi 


Change “m” into “p” by means of “ca” in this Sutta and attach it to 


८८, 22 


the next “p”. 


Kakarassa ca dakaro hoti. 
The consonant “k” is changed into “d”. (These also are ad- 
ditional functions applicable through “ca” 


[CS] 
[SS] 


* Sad’atthapasuto siya 

Sa+katthapasuto siya. 

Sakatthapasuto-focused on one’s own best interest. siya-one should 
be. i.e. One should be focused on one’s own wellbeing. 
[Saka-selfrattha-interest or businesstpasuto-involved or focused] 


Dakarassa ca takaro hoti. 

The consonant “0” changes into "t". 

[Note that this function is similar to the function applied by 
means of “ca” in Sutta 20. Refer to “to dassa", the split- 
Sutta function] 

* Sugato>Sugado-gone well, or the one who speaks good words. 


३६, ४७. क्वचि ओ ब्यञ्जने 


36, 47. Kvaci o byafij ane [Kvaci*o-*byafijane. 3 words] 
[V] Byafijane pare kvaci o-kara'gamo hoti. 


When a consonant follows behind, the vowel “o” is some- 
times inserted (in front of it). 


[CS] 


[SS] 
[SM] 


(a) * Atippago' kho tava savatthiyarh pindaya caritum. 
Atippago’ kho-it is too early. tava-first. savatthiyarh-in the city of 
Savatthi. pindaya-for alms. cariturh-to go around. 

i.e. It is still early to go for alms in the city of Savatthi. 

(b) * Paro'sahassam-more than thousands. 

[para-more than-*sahassam -thousand] 

(a) ° Atippat+kho (b) ° Para*sahassam. 

For (a), Insert “o” in front of “kh” by this Sutta. [atippat+otkho] 
Insert “g” by the preceding Sutta in front of “o” [atippa+g+otkho] 
Attach “g” to “o”. It is done. 

For (b), Insert “o” by this Sutta in front of “s”. At this stage, it will 
look like this: [° Parato+sahassarh]. Elide “a” as there is “0” present 
behind at the union of two vowels [Part+to+sahassarh.]. Attach “r” to 
next “0” . It is done. 


163 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


Kvacr ki kasma? 
Why is there the word *kvaci" in Sutta? 
Itis to show that the function of this rule is inapplicable in 
some instances shown below as restricted by *kvaci". 
[CS] (a) * Etha'passathi' mam lokam. 
(b) * Andhibhüto ayam'loko. 
[CS] (a) * Etha*passatha*imam lokam. (2 points of Sandhi) 
Etha-come! passatha-see! imarh-this. lokam-world. 
i.e. Come and see this world! 
(b) * Andhi bhüto ayam loko. 
andhi bhüto-is being blind. ayarh-this. loko-world. i.e. This 
world 15 being blind (as majority of beings lack wisdom). 


[T2 ११ 


[SM] For (a), no Sandhi function at the first point, inserting “o” in front of 


6८८७२११ 


p" is inapplicable. At the second point, the front vowel “a” of “tha” 
is elided and “th” is attached to the next “i”. 
For example (b), no specific Sandhi function is applied. 


३७, ५७. निग्गहितञ्च 
37, 57 Niggahitafi'ca [Niggahitarh+ca. 2 words] 
[V] Niggahitafi'ca' gamo hoti sare va byafijane và pare kvaci. 


When either a consonant or a vowel is present behind, “116 
niggahita-m" is sometimes inserted (in front of that vowel 
or consonant). 


[CS] (a)* Cakkhurh’udapadi. 
(b) * Avarh’siro. 
(c) ° Yava'fic'idha bhikkhave 
(d) * Purimam jatim sarami. 
(e) * Anum'thülani sabbaso. 
(f) * Manopubbangama dhamma. 
[SS] (a)* Cakkhu-udapadi. 
Cakkhu-the wisdom eye. udapadi-arose, appeared. 
(b) * Ava+siro-with the head being downward. 
(c) * Yavatcatidha bhikkhave (2 points). 
Yava ca-very much. idha-here. bhikkhave-monks! 


164 


Sandhi 


(d) ° Purima*jatim sarami. 
Purimajatim-the previous life. sarami-(I) remember. 
(e) * Anu+thulani sabbaso. 
Anuthülani-small and big unwholesome things. sabbaso-by all 
means. [anu-small--thüla-big] 
(f) ° Mano pubba+gama dhamma. (Re Sutta 23) 
[SM] For (a) (b) (d) (e), just insert “th” in front of each “u, s, j, th". It is 
done quite easily. 
For the first point of (c), insert “m” in front of “c”. Change that “th” 
into “ñ” by Sutta 31 and attach it to next consonant “e”. It will look 
like this [s Yavatiicatidha]. Now, at the second point, elide the 
front vowel “a” of “fica” and attach the conjunct consonants “fie” to 
next “i”. Then, it will look like [० Yavaficidha".] It is done now and 
becomes a perfectly combined Sandhi. 
As for (f), insert “rh” in front of “g”. Then, change it into “ñ” by Sut- 
ta 31. Attach it to next "ga". It is done. 
Kvacr’ti kasma? 
Why is there the word “kvaci” in Sutta? 
Itis to show that the function of this Sutta is inapplicable in 
some instances shown below as restricted by *kvaci". 
* Tdhe’va nam pasamsanti. * Pecca sagge pamodati. 
Idha eva-even here in this world. narh-to that person. pasamsanti-(the 
wise) praise. Pecca-in the next life. sagge-in the heaven. pamodati-(he) 
rejoices. i.e. Even in this world, the wise praise him. In next life too, he 
rejoices in the heaven. 
*Na hi etehi yanehi, gaccheyya agatam disam. 
Na-not. hi-in fact. etehi-by these. yanehi-vehicles, gaccheyya-(one) 
may go. agatam-never gone before. disam-to the direction of Nibbana. 
i.e. In fact, one would not reach the never-gone-before direction of 
Nibbana by means of these physical vehicles. 
In the stanza above, there are only two examples: 
[CS] (a) * Idhe'va (b) * Pecca sagge (c) * Na hi etehi 
[SS] (a) * Idhateva (b) * Peccat+sagge (c) * Na hi etehi 
[SM] For (a) just elide the front vowel “a” and attach “dh” to next “e”. It is 
done. This example is where a possible Sandhi is inapplicable be- 
tween two vowels a and e. 
For (b,c), there is no Sandhi at all. 


165 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


Caggahanena vi-saddassa ca pa-karo hoti. 
By means of “ca” in the Sutta, “vi” sometimes becomes 
“pa”. 
[CS] ° P’acessati. * Vicessati và. (*means inapplicable example) 
[SS] * Pa’cessati-will choose.>Vi’ cessati-will choose. 
[SM] A very simple procedure. Just change “vi” into “pa”. It is done. 
Note that both “vi” and “pa” are two upasagga words which are in- 


66 099 


terchangeable in terms of meaning. The upasagga “vi” means spe- 
cially or specifically and “pa” means “in various ways, or analytical- 
ly”. Both are widely used as prefixes of the Pali verbs which can im- 
pact the meaning of roots in various ways. 


३८, ५३. क्वचि लोपं 
38, 53. Kvaci lopam [Kvacitloparh.2] 
[V] Niggahitam kho sare pare kvaci lopam pappoti. 


When a vowel follows behind, the front “the niggahita-rh” 
is sometimes elided. 


[CS] (a)* Tasa’ham santike. (b)* Vidüna'gga' miti. 
[SS] (a)* Tasam-aham santike. 
Tasarh-of those women. aharh-I. santike-at the proximity, near. 
i.e. I (am) at proximity of those women. 
(b) * Vidünam-aggam-iti (2 points of Sandhi). 
Vidünam-among the wise. aggam iti-as the most noble. 
[SM] For (a), elide “ar” by this Sutta and lengthen next “a” into “a” by 


6८८११ 


15. Then, attach “s” to next “a”. It is done. 
For the first point of (b), elide “arh” and attach “n” to next “a”. For 
the second point, change “th” into “m” by 34 and attach it to next “i”. 
It is done. 
Kvacr ti kasma? 
Why is there the word “kvaci’” in Sutta? 
It is to show that the function of this rule is inapplicable in 
some examples like the one shown below as restricted by 
the word “kvaci”. 
* Aha’meva nina balo. * Eta'mattham viditvana. 
[CS] (a) * Aha’meva nina 0910. 
(b) * Eta'mattham viditvana. 


166 


Sandhi 


[SS] (a) * Aharh+eva nina balo. 
Ahar eva-I only. nüna-? balo-(am) stupid? i.e. Am I only stu- 
pid? 
[nüna-is a nipata particle which signifies both question and 
doubt] 
(b) * Etarh+atthar viditvana. 
Etam-this. attharh-meaning or fact. viditvana-having known. 
i.e. Having known this meaning or fact. 
[SM] In both (a-b), change “th” into “m” by 34 and attach it to next vow- 
els. That is it. 


३९, ५४. ब्यञ्जने च 
39, 54 Byanj ane Ca [Byañjane+ca. 2 words] 
[V] Niggahitam kho byafijane pare kvaci lopam pappoti. 


When a consonant is present behind, the front “niggahita- 
m" is sometimes elided. 


[CS] (a)* Ariyasaccana'dassanam. 
(b) Etarh * buddhana'sasanam. 
[SS] (a)* Ariyasaccanam-dassanam. 
Ariyasaccanarh-of the noble truths. dassanam-seeing or know- 
Ing. 
hs Seeing of noble truths. 
(b) Etam * buddhanam- sasanam. 
Etam-this. buddhanam- of Buddhas. sasanam-is the teaching. 
i.e. This 1s the teaching of Buddhas. 
[SM] For both examples, just elide the front “m” by this Sutta and it is 
done. No further action required. 
Kvacr' ti kasma? 
Why is there the word “kvaci” in Sutta? 
Itis to show that the function of this rule is inapplicable in 
some examples shown below as restricted by *kvaci". 
(a) * Etam mangala’muttamam. 
(b) * Tam vo vadami bhaddante. 
[CS] (a) * Etam mangalam'uttamam. 
[SS] (a)* Etam mangalarh+uttamath. 


167 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


Etam-this. mangalam-is blessing. uttamarh-the noble. 
i.e. This 1s the noble blessing. 
(b) * Tam vo vadami bhaddante. [No sandhi] 
Tarh-that word. vo-to you. vadami-(I) say. bhaddante-your hon- 
orable. i.e. Your honorable! I say that to you. 
[SM] Although “th” should be elided in both examples, it is not elided. No 
Sandhi process except in (a) where it is shown by a plus sign. Just 


[DEED 


change “m” into “m” by 34 and attach it to the next vowel “u” . It is 
done. There is no Sandhi in (b). 


४०, ५५, परो वा सरो 
40, 55. Paro và saro [Parot+vatsaro. 3 words] 
[V] Niggahitamha paro saro lopam pappoti va. 


The vowel after “the niggahita-rh” is sometimes elided. 


[CS] (a) Bhasitam * abhinandun'ti. 
(b) * Uttattam' va. (c) ® Yathabrjam' va. 
(d) ° Yathadhafifiam' va. 
[SS] (a) Bhasitam ° abhinandum-iti. 
Bhasitam-to what has been said (by Buddha). abhinandum- 
(they) were rejoiced. iti-this is the end of discourse. 
(b) ° Uttattarhn+iva. 
Uttattam iva-like the refined and sufficiently heated gold. 
(c) * Yathabrjarh+iva-like the seed. 
(d) ° Yathadhaüfiam-iva-like whatever kind of grain. 
[SM] For (a), 6106 “i” behind “th” by this Sutta. Then, change “th” into 
“n” by Sutta 31. It is done. 
For (b-c-d) Just elide all the vowels behind “m” by this Sutta. It is 
done. 
Va'ti kasma? 
Why is there the word “va” in Sutta? 
Itis to show that the function of this rule is inapplicable in 
some instances shown below as restricted by “va”. 
* Aha'meva nüna balo. * Eta'dahosi. 
[CS] (a)* Aha'meva nüna balo. (b) * Eta'dahosi. 


168 


Sandhi 


[SS] (a) * Aharh+eva nüna balo. (Re: Sutta 38) 
(b) * Etarnt+ahosi. 
Etam-this thought. ahosi-happened, occurred. 

[SM] For (a), change “th” into “m”. For (b), change “m” into “d” by Sutta 
34. Then, attach those “m” and “d” to the next vowel. 


४१, ५६. ब्यञ्जनो च विसञ्ञोगो 
41, 56. Byafijano ca visafifiogo. 
[Byafijano-*ca-visafifiogo. 3 words] 
[V] Niggahitamha parasmim sare lutte yadi byafijano 
sasafifiogo, visafifiogo hoti. 


After the vowel behind “the niggahita-m” had been elided, 
if that consonant right next to the elided vowel is a double 
conjunct-consonant, then it has to be made into a single 
consonant. 

Summary: This Sutta changes conjunct-consonants located 
behind the deleted vowel after “niggahita-mh” into a single 
consonant. [See the examples and SM to clarify this function] 


[CS] (a)* Evam'sa te asava. (b) * Puppham'sa uppajji. 
See conjunct consonants shown below in bold, underlined. 
[SS] (a)* Evarintassa te asava. 
Evarh-thus. assa-of that person. te asava-those mental taints. 
(b) ° Puppham-assa uppajji. 
Puppharn-flower, i.e. menstruation (figurative expression). assa- 
of that woman. uppajji-occurred. i.e. The flower of that woman 
i.e. menses occurred. 


[SM] For both (a-b), elide “a” behind “rh” by Sutta 40. Now, change con- 


ag? 


junct “ss” into single “s” by eliding one “s” through this Sutta. It is 
done. 
Lutte’ti kasma? 
Why is there the word “lutte” included in Sutta? 
It is to show that in the examples below, there is no “Lutta- 
elision procedure” occurred. So, inapplicable for the rule of 
this Sutta to be applied on them. 
* Eva' massa. * Vidüna'gga' miti. (2 points) 


169 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


[CS] * Eva'massa. * Viditina’ gga’miti (Re: Sutta 38) 
[SS] (a) * Evam-assa. 
Evarh-thus. assa-should have been. 
(b) * Vidünam-aggam-iti. 
[SM] For (a), Just change “th” into *m" by Sutta 34 and attach it to next 
vowel “a”. (For example (b) refer to Sutta 38.) 


Caggahanena tinnarh byafijanana'mantare ye sariipa, 
tesam'pi lopo 1011. 

By means of *ca" included in Sutta, one of similar conso- 
nants conjoined in a cluster of three consonants, has to be 
elided. (See the examples and detailed explanation) 


Note: Only “gg, and tt", two similar consonants can be seen in the sep- 
aration. It will become three when “i” changes into “y” in the morpho- 
logical procedure as per Sutta 21. Then, one “g” and one "t" has to be 
elided as per the function of the word “00” in this Sutta. See SM to un- 
derstand on how all the necessary procedures are done to complete 


the word. 


[CS] (a)* Agya'garam-fire-hut (where sacrifices are performed or 
cooking etc., is done). 
(b) * Patisantharavuty'assa. (Re: Sutta 21) 

[SS] (a)* Aggi-agaram. 
(b) ° Patisantharavutti--assa. 

[SM] For (a), change “i” into “y” by Sutta 21. Now, it will look like: 
“(a) ° Aggy+agararh”. By means of applying the function of “ca” in 
this Sutta, elide one “g” of “gg” where three conjunct consonants 
"egy" are clustered. It then looks like: “(a) ° Agy--agaram". Now, at- 
tach “gy” to the next vowel *a". It is done. 
For (b), change “i” into “y” by Sutta 21. Now, it looks like: 
“(b) * Patisantharavutty--assa". By means of applying the function of 
“ca” in this Sutta, elide one “t” of “tt” where three conjunct conso- 
nants “tty” are clustered. Now, it looks like: 
“(b) ° Patisantharavuty+assa”. It will become a perfectly combined 
word in a Sandhi when conjunct consonants “ty” are attached to the 
next vowel “a”. 


Iti sandhikappe catuttho kando. 
The Fourth Section of Sandhi ends. 


170 


Sandhi 


Paficama Kanda 
The Fifth Section 


४२, 33. गो सरे पुथस्सागमो क्वचि 

42, 32. Go sare puthassa'gamo kvaci. 
[Got+sare+puthassa+agamotkvaci. 5 words] 

[V] Putha-icce'tassa ante sare pare kvaci ga-kara' gamo hoti. 


6699 


When a vowel is present behind, the consonant “g” is some- 
times inserted at the end (back) of the word “putha”. 
[This Sutta inserts a “g” after the word “putha”] 


[CS] ° Putha'geva-is separate (from the enlightened ones.) 
i.e. (The unenlightened one) is separate from the enlightened ones. 
[SS] *Putha-eva. 
[SM] Just insert “g” in front of “e” by this Sutta and attach it to next vowel 
"e". It is done. 
Kvacr ti kasma? 
Why is there the word “kvaci” in Sutta? 
It is to show that the function of this rule is inapplicable in 
examples shown below as restricted by *kvaci". 
* Putha eva. 
[CS] * Putha eva (No Sandhi. Already separated individual words) 


४३, ३३. पास्स चन्तो रस्सो 
43, 33. Passa ca’nto rasso. [Passa*ca-*anto-rasso. 4 words] 
[V] Pa-icce’tassa ante sare pare kvaci ga-kara'gamo hoti. 
anto ca saro rasso hoti. 
When a vowel is present behind, the consonant “g” is some- 


times inserted at the back of (i.e. after) the word “pa” while 
the component vowel “a” is also shortened into “a”. 


[CS] *Pa'geva vutty'assa. 


[SS] *Paà-eva vutty'assa. 
Pa eva-is early. vutti-occurrence. assa-of that thing or person. 
i.e. That person's or thing's occurrence is early. 


171 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


a? ea? 


[SM] Insert “g” after the upasagga word “pa” and shorten “a” into “a” by 
26. Attach “g” to that shortened “a”. It is done. 
Kvacr’ti kasma? 
Why is there the word “kvaci” in Sutta? 
It is to show that the function of this rule is inapplicable in 
the examples shown below as restricted by “kvaci”. 
* Pa eva vutty'assa. 
[CS] * Pa eva (No Sandhi) * Vutty’assa [SM explained in Sutta 41] 


४४, २४ अब्भो अभि 
44, 24. Abbho abhi. [Abbho+abhi. 2 words] 
[V] Abhi-icce’tassa sare pare abbha'deso hoti. 


When a vowel follows behind, the upasagga particle “ab- 
hi" in front, is to be morphed into *abbha". [This Sutta en- 
joins to change upasagga “abhi” into *abbha" when there 
is a vowel following next to it] 


[CS] (a)* Abbhu’diritarh. 
(b) * Abbhu'ggacchati. 
[SS] (a)* Abhi-udiritam-excessively said. 
(b) * Abhi-uggacchati-excessively rises up, spreads. 
[SM] For both (a-b), change upasagga particle “abhi” into “abbha”. 
Elide the last vowel “a” of *abbha". Attach “abbh” to next “u”. It is 
done. 





४५, २५. अज्झो अधि 
45, 25. Ajjho adhi. [Ajjhotadhi. 2 words] 
[V] Adhi-icce’tassa sare pare ajjha’deso hoti. 


When a vowel is present behind, the upasagga particle 
"adhi" in front, is to be morphed into "ajjha". [Function is 
easy to understand as it is to change "adhi" into *ajjha".] 
[CS] (a) * Ajjho'kase-in the open space. 
(b) ° Ajjha' gama-(he) came or realized, attained. 


172 


Sandhi 


[SS] (a)* Adhi-*okase. 
(b) * Adhi+agama. 

[SM] For both (a-b), change upasagga “adhi” into *ajjha". Elide the last 
vowel “a” of *ajjha". Attach “ajjh” to next “o” and “a”. It is done. 





४६, २६. ते न वा इवण्णे 

46, 26. Te na va ivanne. [Te+natvativanne. 4 words] 

[V] Te ca kho abhi,adhi-iccete ivanne pare abbho, ajjho-iti 
vuttarupa na honti va. 


When “i or T’ vowels are present behind, changing the two 
upasagga particles “abhi and adhi" into *abbha and 
ajjha" are not to be carried out. (i.e. not applicable) 
Summary: This Sutta debars changing of two upasagga 
“abhi & adhi" into “abbha, ajjha" when an “i or T’ is pre- 
sent next to it. 

What does it mean? It means that when “i or T” is present in a word next 
to “abhi or adhi", the “abbha, ajjha" function does not usually occur. 
[It is 4 common language pattern found in the Pali texts.] 


[CS] (a)* Abhi'cchitam-excessively wanted. 
(b) * Adhr'ritam-excessively said. 
[SS] (a)* Abhi-icchitam. [Here, “i” is present] 
(b) * Adhi+iritarn. [Here, “T” is present] 
[SM] For both (a-b), elide the front vowels “i” of “abhi and adhi". Attach 
“abh and adh” to next “i” and ‘T’ respectively. It is done. 
Va’ti kasma? 
Why is there the word “va” in Sutta? 
Itis to show that the function of this rule is inapplicable in 
some examples shown below. 
(a) * Abbhr' ritam-(It is) excessively said. 
(b) * Ajjhinamutto-(He) is very much free from debts. 
[CS] (a) * Abbhr' ritam. 
(b) * Ajjhinamutto. 
[SS] (a) * Abbhittritath. 
(b) * Adhit+inamutto 





173 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


[SM] For (a), elide the vowel “i” of “abhi”. Attach *abbh" to next “T”. It is 
done. 
For (b), change "adhi" into ajjh. Elide the last vowel “a” of it. 
Attach “ajjh” to next “i”. It is done. 


४७, 33. अतिस्स चन्तस्स 

47, 23. Atissa ca’ntassa. [Atissatcatantassa. 3 words] 

[V] Ati-icce’tassa antabhütassa ti-saddassa ivanne pare 
“sabbo cam 07" vuttarüpam na hoti. 


When “i or I’ vowels are present behind, changing the word 
“ti” into “ca” as prescribed in Sutta “sabbo cam t1", is not 
applicable. [This Sutta debars the rule of “sabbo carh ti” when an “i or 
1" is after ati, pati, iti. This 1s also a statement about common language 


[T2 E] 


pattern where changing into “c” of “ti” is not always applicable in some 
word-structures. | 


[CS] (a) * Atr'sigano-many group of hermits. 
(b) * Ati’ ritarh-excessively said. 

[SS] (a)* Atitisigano. 
(b) ° Ati-iritarn. 

[SM] For (a) Just elide the front vowel and lengthen next “i” into “१”. 
Attach vowel-less “t” to next vowel *1". It is done. 
For (b), just elide front vowel “i” and attach “t” to next vowel “T”. It 
is done. 





Ivanne'ti kasma? 
Why is there the word * ivanne" in Sutta? 
Itis to show that the function of this rule is inapplicable in 
examples shown below as there is no “i or 1" after it. 
* Acca'ntam (In this example, “ti” of “ati” changes into “cca” as 
there is no “i or T’ behind it, only an *a") 
[CS] * Acca'ntam-beyond the end (limit), certainly (two meanings). 
[SS] * Atirantam 
[SM] Change “ti” of upasagga “ati” into “c” by Sutta 19. Then, reduplicate 
it into "cc". Attach “ce” to next "a". It is done. 


174 


Sandhi 


४८, ४३. Fafa पटि पतिस्स 

48, 43. Kvaci pati patissa. [Kvaci+patitpatissa. 3 words] 

[V] Pati-icce'tassa sare va byarijane và pare kvaci pati-adeso 
hoti. 


When either a vowel or a consonant follows, the upasagga 
particle “pati” in the front optionally changes into “pati”. 
Note: Both “pati and pati" are upasagga particles of the 
same meaning. Only “t & t" are different but interchangea- 
bly used in the Pali texts. 


[CS] (a)* Pata'ggi databbo. 
Pata'ggi-counter-fire. databbo-should be given. (When a forest- 
fire breaks out, one should start a small fire before it reaches one's 
place. This preventive fire is called “Pața’ ggi”) 
(b) * Pati haññati. (Re Sutta 25) 
[SS] (a) * Pati*aggi databbo. 
(b) * Pati hafiríati. 
[SM] For (a), change the upasagga word “pati” into “pati. Elide “i” of 
Pati. Attach “pat” to the next “a”. It is done. 
For (b), just change “pati” into "pati". It is done. 





Kvacr’ti kasma? 
Why is there the word “kvaci” in Sutta? 
It is to show that the function of this rule is inapplicable in 
some instances shown below as restricted by “kvaci”. 
* Paccantimesu janapadesu. * Patiltyati. 
* Patirüpadesavaso ca. 
[CS] (a) * Paccantimesu janapadesu. 


Paccantimesu-at extremely distant, far-flung. janapadesu- 
districts. 

(b) * Patilryati. (Re Sutta 25) 

(c) * Patirüpadesavaso ca. 
Patirüpadesavaso ca-living at suitable place also (15 good for 
general progress). 

[SS] (a) * Pati*antimesu janapadesu. 
(b) * Patilryati. 
(c) * Patirüpadesavaso ca. 


175 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


[SM] For (a), change “ti” of “pati” into “c” and reduplicate it as “ec”. 
Attach “ee” to next “a”. It is done. 
For (b-c), there is no Sandhi process. Hence, no SM required. 


४९, ४४. पुथस्सु ब्यञ्जने 

49, 44. Puthassu? byanj ane. [Puthassa+u+byafyane. 3 words] 

[V] Putha-icce’tassa anto saro byafijane pare u-karo hoti. 
When a consonant is present behind, the vowel “a” of the 


66,99 


word “putha”, changes into an “u”. [present behind-follows] 


[CS] (a) " Puthu’jjano-un-enlightened person, common worldling. 
(b) * Puthu'bhütam-being multitude. 

[SS] (a)* Puthatjano. 
(b) * Putha*bhütamrn. 

[SM] For (a), change “a” of *putha" into *u" by this Sutta. Reduplicate “j” 
as “jj” by Sutta 28. It is done. 


6८८७११ 


For (b), change “a” of “putha” into *u" by this Sutta. It is done. 





Antaggahanena aputhassa’pi sare pare antassa u-karo hoti. 
By means of anta (included in Vutti, see the word *anto"), 
the component vowels of other words rather than the word 
“putha”, also changes into “u”. 

[CS] *Manu'fifiam-the pleasing object (n) or being pleasant (adj). 

[SS] ° Mano-afitiam. 

[SM] Change the front vowel “o” into “u” by means of the word “anta” in 

the Sutta. Elide the next dissimilar vowel “9” by Sutta 13. It is done. 


५०, ४५. ओ अवस्स 

50, 45. 0 avassa. [O+avassa. 2 words] 

[V] Ava-icce'tassa byaiijane pare kvaci o-karo hoti. 
When a consonant is present behind, the upasagga “ava” 
sometimes changes into an “0”. 
Note: This Sutta changes “ava” into “o”. So, keep in mind 
that *ava" and “0” are interchangeable. 


176 


Sandhi 


[CS] Andhakarena ° o'naddha. 
Andhakarena-by darkness of ignorance. o’naddha-are entangled, 
blinded. 
[SS] *ava-*naddha. 
[SM] Change upasagga word “ava” into “o”. It is done. 
Kvacr’ti kasma? 
Why is there the word “kvaci” in Sutta? 
It is to show that the function of this rule is inapplicable in 
some instances shown below as being restricted by “kvaci”. 
[CS] * Ava'sussatu me sarire mamsalohitam. 
Ava'sussatu-let it dry up. me-my. sarire-in the body. marhsa, lo- 
hitarh-flesh and blood. i.e. “Let flesh and blood in my body dry up” 
( will not cancel my sitting meditation until I attain enlightenment- a 
firm vow made by the Buddha-to-be). 
[SM] * Avasussatu (Ava+susa+tu, dv) No change of “ava” into “o” oc- 
curred. So, no Sandhi in this example. 


५१, ५९. अनुपदिट्ठानं वुत्तयोगतो 
51, 59. Anu'paditthanam vuttayogato. 
[na-upaditthanam-vuttayogato.2] 
[V] Anupaditthanam upasagga, nipatanam sarasandhihi byafija- 
nasandhihi vuttasandhthi ca yathayogam yojetabbam. 


The Sandhi procedures not previously shown regarding the 
vowel Sandhi or the consonant Sandhi or the niggahita 
Sandhi for any '*Upasagga and Nipata-prefixed words, can 


There are twenty Upasagga particles commonly used as prefixes in the 
beginnings of certain verbs and words. They are: Pa, para, ni, ni, u, du, 
sam, vi, ava, anu, pari, adhi, abhi, pati, su, à, ati, api, apa, upa. 

There are many Nipdta particles. Some of the Nipdta particles found in this 
grammar text are: Na, no, hi, ca, tu, pana, và, nava, ve, vibhasa, atha, 
athava, atha kho, iva, eva, viya, samma. See Sutta 221 for a more detailed 
explanation. 


177 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


be carried out (either by any applicable means shown in 
the preceding Suttas or by this great Sutta Mahavutti). 


Examples: The word in squiggly brackets shows an upasagga or a nipata as 
an initial part of the example word. See footnote below. 


(1) {pa} *Pa'/panam» Pa+apanarh-specifically arriving 
[SM] Elide the front “a” and attach “p” to the next “a” 
(2) {para} ® Para’ yanarh> Para+ayanarh-shelter, refuge. 
(3) {upa} ° Upa’yanarh> Upatayanarh-carrying closely. 
e Upa’hanam> Upatahanarh-slippers, such as shoes etc,. 
(MS 15 the same as foregoing example) 
(4) {ni} *Nyà'yogo» Ni+a’yogo-consistent effort 
[SM] Change “i” into “y” and attach it to next “a” 
e Ni’ rupadhi> Ni*upadhi-without Upadhi (base). 
[SM] Insert “r” in front of “u” and attach it to next “u” 
Note: Attaching the inserted consonant to the next vowel 1s quite a 
necessary process for Pali words written in Asian Languages. But, 
for Romanized Pali, it is almost unnecessary as both vowel and 
consonants are written in tandem without being conjoined to- 


gether. Even if it is unnecessary, it is shown in SM as a way of 
adhering to the formal standard morphological procedures. 


(5) {anu} * Anu’bodho> Anu-bodho-knowledge based on method or 
inference. 
[SM] Keep as a “Pakati” without any alteration through Sandhi proce- 
dure. This is the only example of “pakati Sandhi”. 


(6) {du} * Du'vüpasantam» Du+upasantarh-bad calm. 
[SM] Insert “v” in front of “u” and lengthen “u” by 25 & attach it to “a”. 


(7) {su} * Suv’tpasantarn> Sut+upasantath-good calm. 
[SM] Insert “v” in front of “u” and lengthen “u” by 25 & attach it to “a”. 


15 Some grammarians view this Sutta as an atidesa Sutta without having any 
specific rule while some such as Balavatara view it as a vidhi Sutta having 
broader specific functions. The latter is more relevant as there are some 
words in the Pali texts whose Sandhi-procedures are not shown. The words 
added inside the parenthesis are reflective of those views of the grammarians. 


178 


Sandhi 


(8) {du} * Dva'layo» Du-a'layo-bad base or bad desire. 
[SM] Change “u” into “v” and attach “dv” to “a”. 


(9) {su} ® Sva'layo» Su+a’layo-good base, good desire. 
[SM] Change “u” into “v” and attach “dv” to “a”. 

(10) {du} * Du'rakhyatam- Du’+akhyatarh-badly said. 
[SM] Insert “r” in front of “a” and attach it to “a”. 

(11) {su} ° Sva’khyato > Sut+akhyato-well said. 
[SM] Change “u” into “v” and attach “sv” to “a”. 


Note: In majority of Buddhist texts, the word “Svakkhato” is mostly 
found without consonant “y” after *kh". It is to be separated as 


ee 


Sutakkhato. Just change “u” into “v”. 
(12) {u} * U’diritam> U+itritarh-much said. 
[SM] Insert “d” in front of “1” and attach it to “T”. 
(13) {sam} ° Sa’muddittham> Sam-uddittham-well expounded. 


661,7? 


[SM] Change “th” into “m” by 34 and attach it to next vowel “u”. 
(14) {vi} ® Vi’ yaggarh> Vidaggarh-specially noble. 
[SM] Insert *y" in front of *a" and it is done. 
(15) {vi} ® Vi'jjhaggam- Vicadhi-aggam-especially more noble. 
[SM] Change “adhi” into “ajjha” by 45 [Vitajjhataggarh]. Elide the in- 
itial “a” of “ajjha” by Sutta 13 [Vi*jjha*aggam]. Also, elide the 
last “a” of “jjha” by Sutta 12 and attach triple consonant “jjh” to 


6699 


next “a”. It is done [Vitjjh+aggarh]. 
(16) {vi} * Bya’ggarh> Viraggarh-specially noble. 
[SM] Change “i” into “y” by 21 and attach “vy” to next “a”. It is done. 
(17) {ava} ° Ava’yagamanarh> Ava+agamanath-badly coming. 
[SM] Insert “y” in front of “a” by 35. It is done. 
(18) {anu} ® Anve’ti> Anu-eti-subsequently follows. 
[SM] Change “u” into “v” by 18 and attach “nv” to next vowel “e”. 
e Anu’paghato> Anat+upaghato-unharmed. 
[SM] Elide front “a” by 12 and attach “n” to next ^u". 
(19) {ana or anu} * Ana’cchariyarh> Ana+acchariyarh-not surpris- 


ing. Also: Anu+acchariyath-repeatedly surprising. 
(Please Note: Two possible SS for this word as “ana” 


179 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


can be a morpheme of Nipdta particle “na-not” or 
upasagga “anu-repeatedly”’. 
[SM] In both SS, elide the front vowels and attach “n” to next vowels. It 
is quite a simple process. 
(20) {pari} * Pari’ yesana> Parit+esana-search. 
[SM] Insert *y" in front of “e” by 35. 
(21) {para} ° Para’maso> Paratamaso-repeatedly rubbing and touch- 
ing something or wrongly holding a view or an idea. 
[SM] Elide the front “a” and attach “r” to next “a”. 
evam sare ca honti. 
Thus, (these shown above are examples of) vowel-Sandhi. 


(1) {pari} ® Pari’ ggaho> Parit+gaho-taking possession. 
(2) {pa} ° Pa’ ggaho> Pat+gaho-supporting by means of encouragement. 
etc. 
e Pakkamo> Pat+kamo-leaving away, departure. 
e Parakkamo> Parat+kamo-continuous effort. 
(3) {ni} * Ni’?kkamo> Ni--kamo-departure. 
° Ni’kkasavo> Nitkasavo-without taint of defilements. 
e Ni’llayanarh> Ni+layanarh-hiding. 





(4) {du} * Du’llayanarn> Du+layanarh-badly based. 
[SM] For all these examples above, reduplicate a similar consonant in 
front of each relevant consonant and attach to it. 
० Du’bbhikkham> Du+bhikkharh-famine, scarcity of food. 
[SM] Reduplicate a dissimilar consonant “b” in front of “bh” and attach 
to it. 
(5) {du} * Du’bbuttarh>Du-+buttarh-badly said. 
[SM] Reduplicate a similar consonant “0” and attach to it. 
(6) (sam) ° San'dittham > Sarh+dittharh-well seen or to be seen by 
oneself. 
[SM] Change “th” into “n” by Sutta 31 and attach that “n” to “di”. 
(7) {du} * Du'ggaho» Du+gaho-bad taking. 
(8) {vi} ® Vi ggaho» Vit+gaho-specially taking or dispute. 
(9) {ni} * Ni’ ggato> Nit+gato-leaving. 


180 


Sandhi 


(10) {abhi} ® Abhi’kkamo> Abhi+kamo-advancing. 


(11) {pati} * Pati'kkamo- Patit+kamo-going backward. 
[SM] For all these examples, just reduplicate similar consonants and 
attach it to the next consonant to form conjuncts. 
evam byafijane ca. 
Thus, (these shown above are examples of) consonant- 
Sandhi. 
5659 sabbe yojetabba. 
All the rest (of other similar examples from various source 
of texts) should be similarly applied. 


Note: Necessary morphological procedures for completing all the ex- 
amples shown in the Sutta can be performed by means of this Sutta alt- 
hough most of examples are similar to those already shown in the pre- 
vious Suttas. In addition, other various examples of Sandhi found in the 
wider areas of Pali texts can also be completed. 


Iti sandhikappe paficamo kando. 
The Fifth Section of Sandhi ends. 


Sandhikappo nitthito. 
Sandhi Chapter ends. 


181 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


182 


Nama Kappa 


2. Nama Kappa 
Nouns Chapter 


Pathama Kanda 


The First Section 


५२, &o. जिनवचनयुत्तं हि 
52, 60. J inavacanayuttam hi. [Jinavacanayuttam-hi. 2 words] 
[V] “Jinavacanayuttarh hi” 1cce'tam adhikarattharh veditabbam. 


This “Jinavacanayuttam hi" Sutta is to be known as an 
Adhikara (Prevailing or governing rule) Sutta. 


Summary: Jinavacanayuttam hi means that “only what 
conforms to the words of Buddha,” i.e. usage in the Bud- 
dhist texts, (shall be applied throughout this grammar.) 
Note: This influences all the preceding and succeeding Suttas regarding 
the observation of important grammatical principle of conformity to the 
relevant and applicable usages in the Pali Buddhist texts. 
[Adhikara-Adhi-By prevailing over, influencing+kara-to do+ma-act of. This 
applied affix na is in the base structure of the word] 

There are three kinds of adhikara: 

(1) stha-gatika.This type affects all the preceding and succeeding 
Suttas. [stha-the lion's*gatika-mode of motion all over] 

(2) mandüka-gatika. This only affects a certain few Suttas of rele- 
vant and related nature from here and there. [mandüka-the 
frog’st+gatika- mode of leaping] 

(3) yathanupubbika. This kind of Sutta affects in orderly manner of 
sequences, especially succeeding Suttas [yatha-according totanu 
pubbika-the order of sequence]. This Sutta is the first type which is 
also very important grammatical principle for the whole text. 


५३, ६१. लिङ्गञ्च निप्पज्जते 

53, 61. Lingafi'ca nippajjate. [Lingai-ca*nippajjate. 3 words] 

[V] Yatha yatha jinavacanayuttam hi lingam, tatha tatha idha 
lingafi'ca nippajjate. 


183 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


The genders of nouns will be laid out and explained here in 
this grammar only in ways that conform to the usage pat- 
terns of Buddha’ words. i.e., prevalent linguistic pattern and 
usage applicable in the Buddhist texts. 

Tam yatha? 

What is that? (i.e. for example) 

* Eso no sattha. * Brahma . ° Atta. ° Sakha. ° Raja. 
[Translation of Examples] Eso-that person, no-our, Sattha-(is) teach- 
er. i.e. That person is our teacher. 

Brahma-Holy Brahma, God. Atta-soul, oneself (a reflexive pronoun, 
two meanings). Sakha-friend. Raja-King. 


Linga (Genders) 

There are three genders: masculine, feminine and neuter 

genders. 

(1) The outstanding feature of masculine gender nouns is 
“0”. e.g. manusso (the man), Buddho (Buddha) etc. 

(2) The outstanding feature of the feminine gender nouns 
are “Aa, I and inr". e.g., mala (the flower), 100 (the river), 
rajini (the princess). 

(3) Major feature for the neuter gender nouns is “am”. e.g., 


Vanar (the forest), phalarh (the fruit) etc. 
Note: All features are for nouns in nominative singular. This is a tradi- 
tionally taught basic for the beginners. Please note this fact clearly. 


Gender and Nouns 
These linga (genders) are to be assigned to each individual 
nouns such as masculine gender noun, feminine gender 
noun and neuter gender nouns. There are various kinds of 
nouns which students of grammar should understand as a 
basic knowledge. They are: 
(1) Nama nama-individual nouns with specific gender. 
(2) Sabba nàma-common nouns such as ya-which, ta, eta- 
that, ima-this, kih-what, amu-so and so, which have varia- 
ble three genders. 


184 


५४, 


Nàma Kappa 


(The pronouns such as tumha-you, and amha-me, are 
included in this group though they have no specific gen- 
der) 

(3) Samasa nama-compound nouns with specific gender. 

(4) Taddhita nama-nouns in Taddhita-affixes with specif- 
ic gender. Numerical nouns are also included in this 
group though some are of variable gender. 

(5) Kita nama-nouns in Kita-affixes with specific gender 
(Unadi-affixed words included in this category). 

Note: The term *Nama" means noun. 


६२. ततो च विभत्तियो 


54, 62. Tato ca vibhattiyo. [Tato+ca+vibhattiyo. 3 words] 


[V] 


Tato jinavacanayuttehi lingehi vibhattiyo para honti. 


The Vibhatti, (i.e. prepositions or case-endings of nouns) 
are to be applied after those nouns of specific genders in 
line with the prevalent usage in the Buddhist texts. 


Summary: This Sutta clearly sets out the rule that the 
vibhattis are to be applied after nouns of clearly defined 
three genders in order to be changed into various word- 
forms and inflections in accordance with the prescribed 
morphological rules of Suttas in this grammar text. 
Verb-terminations also similarly known as vibhatti are to 
be applied after the roots in the case of Pali Akhyata verbs. 
See Vibhatti for nouns in the next Sutta. The other 
Vibhatti for verbs will be shown in the first section of 
Akhyata. 

Note: Even though it cannot be defined in terms of noun or 
gender, some certain upasagga and nipdta particles, which 
are used as an independent word in a sentence are applica- 
ble to this rule as an exception. 

Vibhatti means that which defines and distinguishes between what 15 


one and what is more than one, i.e. singular and plural. (vi-specifically, 
bhatti-setting aside, to divide). Vibhatti means preposition, but the 


185 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


५५, 


translated English term is a misnomer as the vibhattis are to be applied 
after nouns, a rather different linguistic norm most prevalent in the an- 
cient Indian languages and one aspect different from the English gram- 
mar. *14 Vibhattis" will be shown in the next Sutta. [Vibhatti-Vi- 
specially+baja-to assign--ti-act of. A feminine gender Kita-noun word] 


६३. सि यो, ef यो, ना हि, स नं, em हि, स नं, स्मि सु 


55, 63. Si yo, am yo, nā hi, sa nam, sma hi, sa nam, 


[V] 


smim su. 
[Si yo, am yo, na hi, sa nam, sma hi, sa nam, smirh su.1 word] 
Ka ca pana tayo vibhattiyo? 


What are those Vibhatti (noun case-endings) ? 


Si, yo iti pathama. 
am, yo iti dutiya. 
na, hi iti tatiya. 

sa, nam iti catutthi. 
sma, hi iti paficaml. 
sa, nam iti chatthr. 
smirh, su iti sattami. 


They are namely: 

(1) Si, yo, these two are called pathama vibhatti (Nominative case, si 
is nominative singular, yo is nominative plural). 

(2) Si, yo, these two are called alapana pathama vibhatti (Vocative 
case). (This is not in the original text, added for the completeness's 
sake for vocative case.) 

(3) am, yo, these two are called dutiya vibhatti (Accusative case, am 
is singular, yo is plural). 

(4) na, hi, these two are called tatiya vibhatti (Instrumental case, na 
is singular, hi is plural). 

(5) sa, nam, these two are called catutthr vibhatti (Dative case, sa is 
singular, nam is plural). 

(6) sma, hi, these two are called paficami vibhatti (Ablative case, 
sma is singular, hi is plural). 

(7) sa, nar, these two are called chatthi vibhatti (Genitive case, sa 
is singular, nam is plural). 

Note that Dative and Genitive case are similar except in the meaning. 


186 


L8I 


THE FOURTEEN NOUN VIBATTI(CASE-ENDINGS) 





Grammatical Term Where to use Suttas to Refer 


(Active Voice) 


ingular Address Alapana To address, to call Alapane ca 
ura 
Dutiya ingul (Object) Kamma To indicate the object Kammatthe Dutiya 297 
Accusative to 


ura Accantasamyoga To express continuity for a Kaladdhana 

certain period or distant maccantasariyoge 298 

Tatiyà gular (Subject) Kattu or Katta To indicate the Subject. Kattari Ca 288 

Instrumental By (For Passive Voice) 

(Instrumental) Karan To indicate the Karane Tatiya 286 
by, With Supporting cause 

With, Together S To indicate the company 


R 

t2 
a 
a 


i 


S 
8 


Subj Kattu or Katta To indicate the Subject, Doer Lingatthe Pathama 284 
F 














Sahadiyoge Ca 287 


By means of, To indicate the Visesane Ca 292 
In regard of specific aspect or Adj 


Due to / for Karana Hetvatthe Ca 289 


Receivership Sampadana To indicate recipient of action Sampadane Catutthi 293 
Purpose 
From Apadana To indicate the source Apādāne Paficami 295 
from which it occurs. 
for / due to Karanatthe Ca 296 
Chatthr (Possesive) Sami To indicate the owner amismirn Chatthr 301 
Genitive of 


Among / out of Niddharana To express selection for Niddharane Ca 304 
comparision 


while,despite Anadara Anadare Ca 305 
SattamT at, in, on Adhikarana To indicate the location or Okase Sattami 302 
Locative or Okàsa position 


among / out of Niddharana To express selection Niddharane Ca 304 
for com 
For / Due to Nimitta Kammakarananimittatthesu 
SattamT 310 


Kalabhavesu Ca 313 


Singular 
Plural 


PaiicamT Singular 
Ablative 


Plural 


ta 


While, When 
Despite, While Anadara Anadare Ca 305 


eddey eureN 


aranam 


ak 


ccayana Pali Vy 


a 
d! 


K 


Vibatti 
to be applied 


Pathama 
Nominative 


Accusative 


Tatiya 
Instrumental 


Catutthi 
Dative 


Paficami 
Ablative 


Chatthi 
Genitive 


Sattami 
Locative 


VARIOUS MORPHOLOGICAL STAGES OF A NOUN 


Base Structure Morphological Function (Re:Sutta Numbers) 
Vibatti is applied after the | In this stage,certain changes takes place to Vibatti & word 
noun in this stage. 
Si changes into"o™ by rule of Sutta 104.» Purisat+O. 
The front "a" is elided.>Puristo 
Purisat+vo Yo changes into "à". Front "a" is elided 107 


Purisa+si Si is termed "ga" and elided. 57- 220 
Purisa+yo Yo changes into "4", front "a" elided. 107 


No changes takes place. Only front "a" elided. 


Purisa+yo Yo changes into "९", front "a" is elided. 107 


Purisat+na Na changes into "ena", front "a" is elided. 103 
Purisa--hi No change. The front "a" turns into "e". 101 


Hi turns into "bhi". Front "a" tums into "e" 99-101 


Purisa+sa No change. An extra "S" is inserted. purisa*ssa 61 
Purisatnarh No change. Front "a" is lengthened into "a" 89 


No change to the applied vibatti. 


Purisa Sma changes into "mha". 99 


Finished Words 


Puriso(Man) 


Purisam 
(To man) 
Purise (To men) 
Purisena 
(With/by man) 
Purisehi 
(With/ by men) 
Purisebhi 
(With/ by men) 
Purisassa 
(Of/ for man) 
Purisanarh 
(Of/ for men) 
Purisasma 
Purisamha 





Sma changes into "à". Front "a" is elided 108 


Refer to changes in instrumental plural 
Purisa+sa Refer to above changes in Dative case. 


Purisat+smim Smith changes into "mhi". 99 


- 
o 
"3 
fæl 
o 
e 
o 
R= 
3 
o 
R 
2 
~ 
S 
Ss 
टे. 
Ss 
A 
= 
= 
Aa 





Smith changes into "e". Front "a" is elided.108 


Purisa+su No change. Front "a" turns into "e". 101 


Purisa (From man) 


Purisanarh 
(Of/ among men) 


Purisasmir 
Purisamhi 

Purise 

(AUIn/on/ by man) 
Purisesu 

(AvIn/on/ by/among men) 





188 


Nàma Kappa 


(8) smith, su, these two are called sattami vibhatti (Locative case, 
smim is singular, su is plural). 

Vibhatti-icca’ nena kvattho? 

By terming these vibhattis, what is the benefit? 

Amhassa mamar savibhattissa se. 

It has the benefit of making easy reference in Suttas such as 

*Amhassa mamam savibhattissa se" etc. 


Note: This Sutta shows all 14 vibhattis. It is very important as it ex- 
plains all fourteen noun-vibhattis or case-endings to be applied after 
every noun. All keen students need to try to familiarize with all fourteen 
of them. See the two tables and study it repeatedly until one clearly 
understands the way they are used as well as the way they are 
transformed into finished words after due procedures as enjoined 
by the rules of respective Suttas . 


The first table explains everything related to noun vibhatti (case- 
endings of nouns) to be applied after them. 

The second table shows a sample of morphological stages of the word 
“Purisa (man) " which is an a-ending noun. By studying the table, the 
student will get an idea how each noun has to go through various stages 
of morphological change as enjoined by the rules of relevant Suttas 
(whose numbers are shown alongside in the table) until it becomes a 
complete word. 

Although these tables are not a complete guide to all the grammatical 
nuances and aspects, it will surely acquaint the student with all essential 
elementary facts of grammar and the structural morphology of words. If 
the students understand this, all procedures explained in this grammati- 
cal text will be much easier and simple to study and understand clearly. 


THE ENDING OF NOUNS 
All nouns are simply grouped according to their base-endings. These endings 
are called *Kara'nta". [kara-syllable-anta-the end. i.e. the end-syllable] 
This is the vowel-ending of a noun in its initial base stage before all the nec- 
essary morphological procedures are done. Altogether, there are eight 
“Karantas” in Pali Language. They are a, à, i, 1, u, पं, o and m. There is abso- 


lutely no “e” nor any consonant-ending as in the Sanskrit grammars. 








NOUN-ENDINGS BASED ON GENDER 
(a) Seven Karantas in the Masculine gender 
There are seven Karantas in the Masculine gender. 


189 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


They are a, à, i, 1, u, ü and o. 

Examples in order of endings: 

To clarify, please see the last ending-vowel in each of these nouns. 
Purisa-man, Sa-dog, Aggi-fire, Dandi-the one who has stick, Setu-bridge, 


Kataiifiu-the grateful person, Go-cow [Pronounce “Go” as *gaw"] 


(b) Six Karantas in the Feminine gender 
There are six Karantas in Feminine gender. They are à, i, 1, u, ü and o. 


Examples in order of endings: 
Mala-flower, Ratti-night, Nadi-river, Yagu-porridge, Vadhü-daughter-in- 
law, Go-cow [This word is a dual gender word] 


(c) Seven Karantas in the Neuter gender 
There are seven Karantas in the Neuter gender. 
They are am, à, i, 1, u, ü and o. 
Examples in order of endings: 
Cittarh-mind, Asaddha-the family without faith, Vari-water, Sukhakari-the 
happiness-making good deed, Ayu-life, Gotrabhü-the mind which trans- 
cends unenlightened state, Cittagu-the cow with color-streaks. 
Note: In the Rüpasiddhi, it is stated *akaranto napumsakalingo Cittasaddo” 
which means “the neuter-gender word Citta ending in a". However, many 
teachers rather prefer as “arh-ending” because it is a very outstanding mark 
of the neuter gender nouns found in the Pali canon. In the Sanskrit grammars, 
there are not only vowel-endings, but also consonant-endings. In Pali, all 
nouns are grouped only in vowel-endings though there are some affix-based 
nouns which can be assumed as the consonant endings such as those ntu- 
affixed ones and those which ends in an ara-morpheme. However, it has 
been grouped based on their base-ending of vowels by the traditional teachers 
of Pali grammar. 


TEMPORARY TERMS FOR SOME ENDINGS 

Some of the endings are given formal temporary terms such as “gha, pa, 

jha and la” in order to carry out some specific morphological procedures. 

Among such endings: 

(1) The “a” of a-ending nouns of feminine gender are given a formal 
temporary name “gha”. [Re: Sutta 60] 

(2) The “i, 1, u and ü" of feminine gender nouns ending in i, 1, u and ü are 
given the formal name of “pa”. [Re: Sutta 59] 

(3) The i, 1, of masculine and neuter nouns ending in i and 1, are given a 
formal name “jha” while u, ū of masculine and neuter gender nouns 
ending in u and ü are given a temporary formal name of “la”. [Re: Sutta 
58] 


190 


५६, 


Nama Kappa 


६४. तदनुपरोधेन 


56, 64 Ta'danu'parodhena. [Tam-ana-uparodhena. 1 word] 


[V] 


५७, 


Yatha yathà tesarh jinavacananarh anu’parodho. 
Tatha tatha idha lingafi'ca nippajjate. 


The gender and the word-forms are to be defined and com- 
pleted (with due morphological procedures) in a way not 


going against the Buddha’s words. (i.e. according to the preva- 
lent usage in the canonical texts). 


७१. आलपने सि गसञ्ञो 


57, 71. Alapane si gasafifio. [Alapane+si+gasaiifio. 3 words] 


[V] 


Alapana'tthe si gasafifio hoti. 


When signifying vocative case, the pathama singular 
vibhatti “si” is to be termed “ga” (by means of this Sutta). 


e bhoti ayye!. * bhoti kaññe!. ® bhoti kharadiye!. (All three are 
examples of Vocative singular, addressed to female gender nouns) 
bhoti ayye-Oh madam! bhoti kafifie-Oh Girl! 

bhoti kharadiye-Oh the girl named kharadiya! (All examples are vs.) 


Alapane’ti kimattham? What is the word *Alapane" for? 
To show that this example “Sā ayya” is not an Alapana, a 
vocative. But, it is an ordinary noun. 

* sa ayya-that lady, ns 

Sr'ti kimattham? [siti=si-the word “si”+it-this] 

What is this word “si” for? 

To show this example “Bhotiyo ayyayo” is vocative noun 
in plural, not a singular “51”. So, irrelevant to name as “ga” 
though it is a noun in vocative case. 

* bhotiyo ayyayo! 

* bhotiyo ayyayo-Oh Madams! vp. 

Ga-icca’nena kvattho? Ghate ca. 

What is the benefit by this term “ga”? 

(When setting out morphological rules), it has the benefit of 


191 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


making easy reference in Suttas such as “Ghate ca” and so 


on. 

Note: There are two “si” vibhattis: 

(1) pathama (nominative) singular vibhatti “si” and 

(2) an Alapana (vocative) Singular “si”. The second is also called “ga- 
termed si" as it is named “ga” by this Sutta. 

The purpose of naming “ga” is to duly perform any necessary mor- 

phological procedure as prescribed by the relevant Suttas. It also ena- 


666,999 


bles to easily distinguish between the two "si" vibhattis, one being 
nominative and the other vocative. 


५८, २९. इवण्णुवण्णा झला 
58, 29. Ivannu’vanna jha,la. [Ivanna, uvanna*jha, là. 2 words] 


[V] Ivannu'vanna-icce' te jha,lasafiiia honti yathasankhyarn. 


The nouns (of masculine and neuter genders) ending in “i-1, 
u-ü" are to be formally termed “jha, la” respectively (by 
means of this Sutta). 


Note:(1) the i, 1 of i, ending nouns of masculine and neuter 
gender are to be termed “jha” and 
(2) the u, ü of u , ü-ending nouns of masculine and neu- 
ter gender are to be termed “la” by this Sutta. 
The purpose of giving this formal temporary term of “jha, 
la" is for easy referencing in the relevant Suttas and to facil- 
itate necessary morphological procedures. 


Examples: 
Isi-hermit, (i-ending noun) 
Dandi-the one who has a stick, (I-ending noun), 
Setu-Bridge, (u-ending noun), 
Sayambhü-Self-enlightened Buddha, (ü-ending noun). 
[Benefit of this formal procedure] By terming “jha, la", all neces- 
sary procedures such as changing the applied vibhatti after 
each of these nouns into “no” etc., can be duly carried out. 


Examples of Sutta 
[i-ending nouns] ® isino-of/for hermits. aggino-of/for fire. 
* gahapatino-of/for householder. 


192 


Nama Kappa 


[I-ending noun] ® dandino-of/for those who have stick. 
[u-ending nouns] * setuno-of/for bridge. 


* ketuno-of/for banner. 
* bhikkhuno-of/for monk. 


[ü-ending nouns] * sayambhuno-of/for self-enlightened ones (i.e. those 


५९, 
29. 
[V] 


Buddhas who attained Buddhahood themselves, without any 
help of outside agent). 
* abhibhuno-of/for the Buddhas who has over-powering 
capacities on defilements etc. All examples are of ds, gs 
Jha, la-icca'nena kvattho? Jhalato sassa no va. 
What is the benefit by this terming of “jha, la”? 
It serves a purpose in duly referencing in Suttas such as 
“Jhalato sassa no va” and so on. 


१८२. ते इत्थिख्या पो 
182. Te itthikhya po. [Te-itthikhya*po. 3 words] 
Te ivannu’vanna yada itthikhya, tada pasaññā honti. 


When those nouns ending in “il, u ü" signify feminine 
gender, they are to be formally termed “pa”. 


[i-ending noun] ® rattiyà-night. 

[i-ending noun] * itthiya-woman. 

[u-ending noun] ° dhenuya-cow. 

[ü-ending noun] * vadhuya-daughter-in-law. (All examples are in is, 
ds, abs, gs, Is. Therefore, the meaning of each example can be translat- 
ed accordingly) 

Itthikhya'ti kimattham? 

What is the word *Itthikhya" for? [Itthi-feminine gender, khya- 
indicative of] 

To show that the examples shown below are of masculine 
gender, not of feminine gender. So, they are not to be 
named “pa” by this Sutta. 

* isina-hermit (is). * bhikkhuna-monk (is). 

Pa-icca’nena kvattho? Pato ya. 

What is the benefit by this term “pa”? 


193 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


६०, 
60, 
[V] 


It serves a purpose in duly referencing regarding pa-termed 


a? 


nouns in Suttas such as “Pato ya” and so on. 


१७७. आ घो 
177. A gho. [A+gho. 2 words] 
A-karo yada itthikhyo, tada ghasafifio hoti. 


When an “ā-ending noun” signifies feminine gender, it has 
to be formally termed “gha” by means of this Sutta. (All ex- 
amples below are a-ending feminine gender nouns. All are of Instru- 
mental, singular cases. However, all these examples can also be in da- 
tive, ablative, genitive and locative singular as they share the same 
morphological procedure.) 


e saddhaya-faith. ® kafifiaya-young girl. ° vinaya-harp. 

e gangaya-the river Ganges. ® disaya-the direction. 

e salaya-public rest house. * malaya-flower. ® tulaya-the scale. 

e dolaya-the cradle. ® pabhaya-the light. ० sobhaya-the beauty 
(In some books, it is found as sotaya-flowing current of the river etc.). 
e pafífiaya-wisdom. ® karunaya-compassion. ० navaya-boat. 

* kapalikaya-small cup or a piece of broken clay pot. 

A'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “A” for? 

To show that the following examples below are not a- 
ending nouns. Hence, they are not to be named “gha”. 

* rattiya-the night. * itthiya-the woman (both examples are of is, ds, 
abs, gs, ७). 

Itthikhyo'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “Itthikhyo” for? 

To show the example word “Satthara” shown below is of a 
masculine gender, not of feminine gender. So, it is irrele- 


vant to be named as “gha”. (It means that despite the word Sat- 
thara ends in an à, it does not denote feminine gender. It is a only 
vibhatti-morpheme “a”) 


* satthara desito ayam dhammo. 
* satthara-by teacher, i.e. Lord Buddha is. desito-was taught, kv. 
ayam-this as. dhammo-Dhamma as. i.e. This Dhamma was taught 


194 


६१, 


Nàma Kappa 


by Buddha. [The sentence is in passive voice construction, with the use of a 
Kita verb] 


Gha-icca' nena kvattho? Ghato nadinam. 

What is the benefit by terming “gha” ? 

It serves a purpose in duly referencing in Suttas such as 
“Ghato nadinarh” and so on. 


८६. सागमो से 


61, 86. Sa'gamo Se. [Sa-agamo-se. 2 words] 


[V] 


Sa-kara'gamo hoti se vibhattimhi. 


An “s” is to be inserted and added (to the front of) “sa” 
when a Catutthi or Chatthi vibhatti singular “sa” is applied 
after a noun. [st+sa>ssa] 

See the added “s” in front of “sa” shown in bold, underlined. 


e purisassa-of man. * aggissa-of fire. ® isissa-of hermit. 

° dandissa-of the one who has stick. ® bhikkhussa-of monk. 

e sayambhussa-of self-enlightened Buddha. ® abhibhussa-of the 
Buddha who possess great dominating power. ds, gs. 

Se'ti kimattam? What is the word “96” for? To show that 
the example below is a noun in smim vibhatti, not of “sa”. 
(So, the function of this Sutta is not applicable) 

* purisasmirh-in man (ls). 


195 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


६२, २०६. संसास्वेकवचनेसु च 
62, 206. Sam,sa,sve'kavacanesu ca. 
[Sarh, sa, su*ekavacanesu-*ca. 3 words] 
[V] Sarh,s4,su ekavacanesu vibhatta' desesu sa-kara’ gamo hoti. 


An "s" is to be similarly inserted to (the front of) "sari and 
sa" when sattami, catutthi, chattht, singular vibhattis have 
been transformed into "sam or sa". 

[s*sam»?ssam, s+sa>ssa] 

Summary: “smir” vibhatti applied after feminine gender noun words 
such as *ya (which), ta, eta (that), ima (this) and amu (so and so) ", 


a? 


change into "sam" while “sa” changes into “sa”. 

This Sutta enjoins an additional “s” to be added to that 
“sarn & sa". The added “s” is shown in bold, underlined. 
Note that Sarh is a derivative morpheme of Smit. Sa is a 
morpheme of sa. Refer to Sutta 179. 


(1) [eta-sarh] * etissarh-at that woman or that thing, Js. 
[eta-sa] * etissa-of that woman or that thing, ds, gs. 
(2) [ima-sarh] ® 1missam-at this woman or that thing, /s. 
[ima-sa] ® imiSsa-of this woman or that thing, ds, gs. 
(3) [ta-sarn] ® tissarh- at that woman or that thing, Is. 
[ta-sa] ® tissa-of that woman or that thing, ds, gs. 
(4) [ta-sarn] ° tassam- at that woman or that thing, Is. 
[ta-sa] * tassa-of that woman or that thing, ds, gs. 
(5) [ya-sath] * yassam- at which woman or that thing, Js. 
[ya-sa] * yassa-of which woman or that thing, ds, gs. 
(6) [amu-sarn] * amussam-at such and such a woman or that thing, /s. 
[amu-sa] * amussa-of such and such a woman or thing, ds, gs. 
Sainsasvr' ti kimattham? [sarhsasviti=sarhsasutiti] 
What is this word *Samsasu" for? To show that the exam- 
ples shown below have no morpheme “Sam, sa" in them. 
So, they are inapplicable. (They have only a na vibhatti 
which is shown underlined) 
* aggina-by fire, from fire, is, abs. * panina-by hand, from hand, 
is, abs. 


196 


६३, 


Nàma Kappa 


Ekavacanesvi ti kimattham? [ekavacanesviti=ekavacanesutiti] 
What 1s this word *Ekavacanesu" for? To show that the ex- 
amples shown below are of plural vibhattis. So, they are in- 
applicable. 

* tasam-those women or things. 

* sabbasam-all women or things. dp, gp. 

Vibhattadesesvr'ti kimattharh? 
[vibhattadesesviti=vibhattadesesuditi] 

What is this word “Vibhattadesesu” for? 

To show that the examples shown below have no vibhatti- 
morpheme in them, hence inapplicable. 

* manasa-mind. * vacasa-speech. 

* thamasa-energy or power. All is. 

Note: sa in the words is not a vibhattadesa, which means vibhatti-origin 
morpheme, so, inapplicable. 

Vibhattadesa=vibhatti+adesa=a Vibhatti derivative, a morpheme of 


vibhatti. It refers to sam, & sa which derives from vibhattis, vibhatti- 
derivative. 


२१७. एतिमास मि 


63, 217. Eti masa' mi. [Eta, imasamrH. 2 words] 


[V] 


Eta,ima-icce' tesa" manto saro i-karo hoti samsasu 
ekavacanesu vibhatta' desesu. 


The last vowel “a” of “eta and ima" changes into “i” when 
“sath, sa" functions have been carried out. [See the completed 


examples carefully. The applied “i” is shown in bold, underlined] 


e etissam. /s ® etissa. ds, gs. 

e imissam. Is * imissa. ds, gs. 

(The meaning shown in the preceding Sutta). 

Samsasvr ti kimattham? 

What is the word “Sarh sasu” for? 

To show that examples below are inapplicable as they have 
no “Sam, sa" in them. 


197 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


६४, 
64, 
[V] 


६५, 
65, 
[V] 


* etaya-of that woman or thing. * imaya-of this woman or thing 
(Both are in ds, gs.) 

Ekavacanesvr ti kimattham? 

What is the word *Ekavacanesu" for? To show that the ex- 
amples shown below are of plural vibhattis. So, they are in- 
applicable. 

* etasam-of those women. * imasarh-of these women. (Both are in 


dp, gp). 


२१६. तस्सा वा 

216. Tassa va. [Tassa+va. 2 words] 

Tassa itthiyarh vattamanassa antassa 4-karassa i-karo hoti 
và sam,sasu ekavacanesu vibhatta’desesu. 


The last vowel “a” of *ta-that lady, that thing of feminine gender" 
changes into “i” when “sarm, sa” functions have been car- 
ried out. [See the completed examples carefully. The applied “i” is 
shown in bold, underlined. The function of both Sutta 63, 64 are the 
same except the nouns they change]. 

e tissarn-in that woman, ls. ® tissa-of that woman ds, gs. 


* tassam Is. * tassa ds, gs. (These are inapplicable examples. 
Refer to Sutta No. 62 for the meaning of examples) 


२१५. ततो सस्स स्साय 
215. Tato sassa ssaya. [Tatot+sassat+ssaya. 3 words] 
Tato tà, eta, ima-to sassa vibhattissa ssaya’deso hoti va. 


The vibhatti “sa” applied after the feminine Sabbanama 
gender noun “ta, età (that woman) and ima (this woman) ” 


sometimes changes into "ssaya". 
[The function of Sutta is easy to understand. See the effect of function 
shown in bold, underlined] 


° tissaya-that woman. ® etissaya-that woman. 
e imissaya-this woman (All examples are of ds, gs). 


198 


६६, 


Nama Kappa 


Va'ti kimattham? [vati=va+iti] 

What is the word “vā” for? 

* tissa. * etissa. * imissa. ds, gs (meaning shown) 

To show that in the above examples, there is no function of 
this Sutta as restricted by the word “vā”. 


२०५. घो vu 


66, 205. Gho rassam. [Gho-rassam. 2 words] 


[V] 


Gho rassa’mapajjate samsasu ekavacanesu vibhatta' desesu. 


The gha-termed vowel “a” of feminine gender nouns such 
as "tà, ya, and sabba (all things of feminine gender), is to be 
shortened when “sam, sa" function follows it (i.e. After that 


function had been done). [The shortened “a” is shown in bold, un- 
derlined] 


e tassam Is. ° [9559 ds, gs. 

e yassam Is. ° yassa ds, gs. 

e sabbassam-all woman or thing Js. 

* sabbassa-all woman or thing ds, gs. 

Samsasvr'ti kimattharh? 

What is the word “Sarh sasu" for? 

To show these examples shown below have no morpheme 
"sam, sa" in them. Hence, inapplicable. 

* taya-that woman or thing. * sabbaya-all woman or thing (Both are 
of ds, gs). 

Ekavacanesvr ti kimattham? 

What is the word “Ekavacanesu” for? 

It shows that the examples shown below are of plural 
vibhattis. So, they are inapplicable. 


* tasam-those women or things. * sabbasarh-all women or things 
8 
(Both are of dp, gp). 


199 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


६७, २२९. नो च द्वादितो नंम्हि 
67, 229. No ca dva'dito nammhi. 
[No+cat+dvi-adito+narnmhi. 4 words] 
[V] Dvi-icce'va'madito sankhyato na-kara’gamo hoti narhmhi 
vibhattimhi. 


An additional consonant “n” has to be added to dative and 
plural case-ending vibhatti “narh” applied after numerical 
nouns such as “dvi-two” etc. [n*nam-?nnam] 


[An added “n” before nam is clearly visible as it is shown in bold, un- 
derlined] 


* dvinnam-two. * tinnam-three. * catunnam-four. 

e paficannath-five. ° channarh-six. ® sattannam-seven. 

* atthannam-eight. ० navannam-nine. ० dasannam-ten 

(All examples are of dp, gp). 

Dvadito’ti kimattharh? [dvaditoti=dvaditotiti] 

What is the word “dvadito” for? 

* sahassanam-of thousands dp, gp. 

The example above is not the word “dvi-two”. It is sahassa 
(thousand). Hence, inapplicable. 

Nammhr ti kimattham? [narhmhiti=narhmhi+iti] 

What is the word *nammhi" for? 

* dvisu-in two, * tisu-in three (Both are of lp). 

The examples shown are of vibhatti “su”, not of “nam”. 
Hence, it is inapplicable. 


Caggahanena ssafi’ca’gamo hoti. 

[ssafi’ca’ gamo=ssamh-ss+ca-also+agamo-to come] 

By means of the word “ca” in Sutta, a double “ssa” is also 
to be inserted and attached to vibhatti “narm” [after catu-four 
and ti-three. ssat+nnarh>ssannam]. 

(See the examples carefully. “ssa” is shown in bold, underlined. An 
added “n” before "nam" is the function applied through the main func- 
tion of this Sutta) 

* catassannarh-four. itthinam-women, i.e. of four women. 

e tissannam-three. vedananam-feelings. i.e. of three feelings. 
(All examples are of dp, gp). 





200 


Nama Kappa 


६८, १८४. अमा पतो सिमिस्मानं वा 
68, 184. A’ma pato smim, smanam va. 
[Ath, 4+pato+smirh, smanarh+va. 4 words] 
[V] Pa-icce’tasma smim,sma-icce'tesam am,a, adesa honti va 
yathasankhyarh. 


The smim, sma vibhattis, applied after “pa-termed, i, 1- 
ending" nouns of feminine gender, change into am and à 
respectively.[Smirh>arh, sma>a.] 
See examples, smirh changed into am, sma into a. Both are shown in 
bold, underlined. Both arh and à functions are shown in each pair of 
examples. 
(1) [i-ending nouns, arh function of smim] 
e matyam. ° matiyarh-at wisdom ls. 
e matya. ° matiya-from wisdom abs. [à function of sma] 
(2) * nikatyam. * nikatiyarm Js. 
e nikatya. ° nikatiya-cunning abs. 
(3) * vikatyam. ° vikatiyam Js. 
e vikatya. * vikatiya-change, transformation abs. 
(4) * viratyam. ° viratiyam Js. 
e viratyà. ® viratiya-abstaining abs. 
(5) ° ratyam. ° rattiyam Js. 
e ratyà. ° rattiya-night abs. 
(6) [1-ending nouns] 
e puthavyam. ° puthaviyam Js. 
e puthavya. ° puthaviya-earth abs. 
(7) [i-ending nouns] 
e pavatyam ७. * pavattiyam abs. 
e pavatya Is. ° pavattiya-event. abs. 


201 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


६९, १८६. आदितो ओ च 
69, 186. Adito o ca. [Aditot+o+ca. 3 words] 
[V] Adi-icce’tasma smirhvacanassa arh, o-àdesà honti và. 


The vibhatti *smim" applied after the noun word "adi", 
sometimes changes into “ar or 0”. 

(adi means beginning, so forth. Sometimes used as an equivalent of 
“etc.” in this grammar. See examples. Both m and o are shown in bold, 
underlined) 


e adii [arh-function]. * Ado [o-function]-in the beginning Is. 
Va'ti kimattham"? 

What is the word “va” for? 

In the examples below, the function of Sutta is not applied 


66, 99 


as indicated by the word “vā”. (That is why the vibhatti smirh and 
its morpheme “mhi” are seen after “adi”. See below underlined) 

* adismim. * adimhi natharh namassitvana. 

* adismim. * adimhi-in the beginning ls. natharh-to the lord Bud- 
dha as. namassitvana-having bowed down, kv, gerund. 

i.e. Having bowed down to the Lord Buddha in the beginning. 





Caggahanena afifiasma’pi smirh-vacanassa 4,0,am-adesa 
honti. 

By means of the word “ca” in Sutta, the vibhatti “smith”, 
applied after other words, can also be morphed into “a, o 
and arh”. (The changed letters are shown in bold, underlined) 

e diva ca * ratto ca haranti ye balim. 

e diva-in day time ls, ca-also nip ° ratto-at night Is. ca-also nip. 
haranti-carry (offer) av. ye-those who np. balirh-offering, sacrifice 
as. 

i.e. Those who carry (offer) sacrifice to (deities) day and night. 

(In each of both examples one “smirh” changes into a and the other 
“smir” changes into **o") 

e varanasim ahu raja. (Here, the “smir” changes into an *am".) 

e varanasim-in the city of Varanasi ls. ahu-there was. av. raja-king 
ns. i.e. there was a king in the city of Varanasi. 


Note: These examples are frequently found in the Pali texts. 


202 


Nama Kappa 


७०, ३०. झलान मियुवा सरे वा 
70, 30. Jha,la,na’miyu’va sare va. 
[Jha, la, nam-1ya, uva+sare+va. 4 words] 
[V] Jha,la,icce-tesam iya,uva-icce'te adesa honti và sare pare 
yathasankhyam. 


Jha-termed “i” changes into “iya”, while la-termed “u” 
changes into “uva” respectively when followed by a vowel 
(in a word structure). 

[See the examples underlined to clarify the function] 

e tiyantarh ® pacchiyagare. * aggiyagare. 


66599 


In these examples, the consonant “y” after i" is a morpheme which be- 
comes iya. 

e tiyantam-ti-antam-three edge ns. [ti-three+antarh-edge] 

e pacchiyagare- pacchi+agare-at basket house ls. [pacchi- 
basket+agare-home] 

e aggiyagare- aggit+agare-fire-house, where sacrifices are per- 
formed ls. [Aggi-fire+agare-house] 

e bhikkhuvasane nisidati. ° puthuvasane nisidati. 

(In these examples, the consonant *v" behind “0” is a morpheme which 
becomes uva) 


* bhikkhuvasane-bhikkhu-+4sane-at the monk’s place ls. 
nisidati-(he) sits. av. [bhikkhu-monk’sHasane-place] 

e puthuvasane- puthu--asane-at the wide place 15. nisidati-(he) 
sits. dv. [puthu-wide and big+asane-place] 

Sare'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “sare” for? 

It shows that in examples below, there is no Sara (vowel) 


behind i and u. So, the function of Sutta is not applied. 
(There is no vowel behind each i & u. See all bold-faced letters shown 
in each example to make it understandable. All examples except the last 
one are Digu compound nouns preceded by numerals. The last example 
is a Kammadharaya compound noun.) 


* timalam-three stains [Ti-three+mala-stain, impurity]. 
* tiphalam-three fruits [phala-fruit]. 
* ticatukkam-three quadriads [catukka-a group of four, quadriad]. 


203 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


* tidandam-three walking-stick [danda-stick]. 
* tilokam-three worlds [loka-world]. 
* tinayanam-three eyes [nayana-eye]. 
* tipasarh-three traps [pasa-trap, snare]. 
* fiharhsarh-three swans [harhsa-swan]. 
* tibhavarh-three existences [bhava-life]. 
* tikhandham-three aggregates [khanda-aggregate]. 
* tipitakam-three baskets (Canonical texts) [pitaka-basket]. 
* tivedanarh-three feelings [vedana-feeling]. 
* catuddisam-the four directions [disa-direction]. 
* puthubhütam-the wide and big [puthu-big--bhüta-that which is]. 
Note: am is derivative morpheme of si, an ns vibhatti applied after all 
nouns of neuter gender. 
Va'ti kimattham? 
What is the word “va” for? 
In the examples below, the function of Sutta is not applied 
as indicated by the word “va”. 
* paficaha’ngehi. * tiha'karehi. * cakkha'yatanam. (These are 
in fact Sandhi examples. See the separation of Sandhi below) 
[SS] * paficahit+angehi. [paficahi-by fivetangehi-factors.] 
* tthitakarehi [tthi-by three+akarehi-manners]. 
* cakkhu+ayatanam [cakkhu-eye+ayatanarh-base]. 
Va ti vikappana’ttham, i-karassa aya’deso hoti. 
The word “va” has a sense of vikappna (speculative grammati- 
cal function). By means of it, the vowel “i” of the word “ti- 


three" changes into “aya”. 

(Of the word Ti, i becomes “aya”>taya+arh=ttayarh, after having one 
“a” dropped, one “t” being reduplicated. See the applied function as 
shown in bold, underlined in the example below) 

e vatthuttayarh-a group of three things ns. [vatthu-things+ttaya- 
group of three] (vatthu--ti-aya*am) 


204 


Nama Kappa 


७१, ५०५, यवकारा च 

71 A 505 Ya,va,kara Ca. [Ya, va, kara+ca. 2 words] 

[V] Jha,la, nam ya-kara,va-kara’desa honti sare pare 
yathasankhyam. 


The vowels “i and ०”, formally termed as “jha, la”, change 
into “ya, va" respectively when a vowel is present next to 
it. [I>y and u>v] 

Note: This pattern of morphological change in the examples shown 
here is somewhat similar to the functions applied in Suttas 21 and 18 in 
the Sandhi section. See y and v of each examples shown in bold to 
clearly understand the function of Sutta. 


e agya’ gararh-fire-house ns. ० cakkhvayatanarh-eye-base ns. 
e sva’ gatarh te mahavira! 


e sva’ gatarh-good coming nv. te-your gs. mahavira-Oh great brave 
one! (a vocative, singular, being addressed to someone so-named. i.e. 
Mahavira, your coming is good. You are welcome Mahavira! 


[SS] *aggi*àagaram. (*i" becomes “y” in this example) 

e cakkhu-ayatanam. 

e su agatam. (“u” becomes “v” in these two examples) 
Caggahanam sam'pindana'ttharn. 
[sam'pindanattham-sam- pindana-merging+attham-for purpose of] 
The “ca” in Sutta is only for sampindana (merging the func- 
tion of preceding Sutta and this Sutta as a whole because 
both Sutta somewhat resemble to each other in changing i 
into iya, ya and u into uva, va). [sam’pindana=sarh-together+ 
pindana-merging] 


७२, १८५, पसञ्ञस्स च 

12, 185. Pa-saññassa ca. [Pa-safifiassatca. 2 words] 

[V] Pasafifíassa ca ivannassa vibhatta’ dese sare pare 
ya-kara’ deso hoti. 


= ज? 


The pa-termed front vowel “i or Y", sometimes changes into 
“ya” when followed by a morpheme vowel “a” of the for- 


205 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


a? 


mer vibhatti “sma”. (See applied function ^y" shown underlined be- 
low) 


e puthavya-from earth. ® ratya-from night. ० matyà-from wisdom. 
(All three examples are of abs) 

Sare’ti kimattham? What is the word “sare” for? 

To show that there is no vowel behind. So, the function of 


Sutta is inapplicable in the example shown below. (See con- 
sonant “y” behind “i” to clarify this). 
* puthaviyam-on earth Js. 


७३, १७४. गाव से 
43, 174. G^ava se. [Gotavatse. 3 words] 
[V] Go-icce’tassa o-karassa ava'deso hoti se vibhattimhi. 


The vowel “o” of the word “go (cow)", changes into “āva” 
when followed by a catuttht and chattht singular vibhatti 
"sa". (i.e. when "sa" has been applied after it) 

Summary: “o” of “go” changes into “ava” in dative and 
genitive singular case-ending "sa". 


ea 


[See the applied function *ava" shown underlined.] 


* gavassa-of cow ds, gs. 
७४, १६९. योसु च 


74, 169. Yosu ca. [Yosutca. 2 words] 
[V] Go-icce’tassa o-karassa Ava’ deso hoti yo-icce’tesu paresu. 


~ 


When a pathamā or an ālapana or a dutiyā plural vibhatti 
“yo” is applied behind, the component vowel “o” of the 
word “go”, changes into “āva”. 


[Masculine] * gàvo gacchanti. * gāvo passanti. 

e gavo-the cattle np. gacchanti-go av. 

e gavo-the cattle ap. passanti-(they) see av. 
[Feminine] ० gàvi gacchanti. * gavi passanti. 

e gavi-the cows np. gacchanti-go ay. 

e gavi-the cows ap. passanti-(they) see av. 


206 


७५, 
75, 
[V] 


Nama Kappa 


Caggahanam kimattham? 
Na,sma,smim-su vacanesu 4va’deso hoti. 


What extra function can the word “ca” in Sutta affect? 

By means of “ca”, when “na, sma, smirh, su” vibhattis are 
applied after the word “go”, the component vowel “o” 
thereof also changes into an “ava”. 

e gavena-by cow is. * gava-from cow abs. ° gave-in cow Is. 

* gavesu-in cows ७. 


१७०. अवंम्हि च 

170. Ava" mmhi ca. [Avatarnmhitca. 3 words] 
Go-icce'tassa o-karassa ava,ava-icce' te adesa honti 
ammhi vibhattimhi. 


When a dutiya singular vibhatti “arh” is applied behind, the 
vowel “o” of the word “go”, changes into “āva and ava". 


* gavam [ava function], 
e gavam-to the cow as [ava function]. 


Caggahanena sa'disesesu pubbu'ttavacanesu go-icce’tassa 
o-karassa ava’deso 1011. 


By means of the word “ca” in Sutta, the component vowel 
“o” of the word “go” can also be changed into “ava” when 
all the remaining vibhattis except am, are applied after the 
word “go”. 

Note: This extra function is applicable when eight vibhattis: two yo, 
two sa vibhattis, na, sa, smirh, su, are applied after the word “go”. 

* gavassa ds, gs. * gavo np, ap. * gavena is. * gava abs. 

० gave Is. * gavesu lp. 


207 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


७६, १७१. आवस्सु वा 

76, 171. Avassw’ và. [Avassatu+va. 3 words] 

[V] Ava-icce'tassa gava’desassa antasarassa u-kara’deso hoti 
và arhmhi vibhattimhi. 
The last “a” of ava, which in itself is a morpheme of “o” of 
the word “go”, sometimes changes into “0” in dutiya singu- 
lar vibhatti “am” case-ending. 


[This Sutta changes the last vowel “a” of “ava” into “u” in accusative, 
singular case of “go”. See *u" on the first example shown in bold] 


e gavum. * gavar. as. 

Avasse'ti kimattharn? 

What is the word “Avassa” for? 

To show that the example below is inapplicable as it has no 
"ava" function, only “ava” function. 

* gavam as. 

Ammhr ti kimattham? 

What is the word “Amhi” for? 

To show that the example below is inapplicable as it is not 
of *am", but of “yo”. 

* gàvo titthanti. * gavo-cows np. titthanti-stand ay. 


208 


Nama Kappa 


७७, १७५, ततो नमं पतिम्हालुत्ते च समासे 
77, 175. Tato na^ mam patimha'lutte ca samase. 
[Tato*namram-patimhi-aluttec-catsamase. 7 words] 
[V] Tato go-saddato namvacanassa arh-adeso hoti. 
Go-icce’tassa 0-karassa ava’deso hoti patimhi pare alutte!ó 
ca samase. 





The component vowel “o” of “go” in Chatti plural *nam" 
changes into “ava”. In addition, the Chatti plural vibhatti 
"nam" also changes into an “arh” in an Alutta compound 
noun (which comprises the word “go” being combined with 
a rear word * pati"). [go-cow+pati-lord] 

Note: This Sutta has two functions: (a) ava function and (b) am func- 
tion. See the example carefully to clarify it. Alutta compound means 
un-elided compound-noun whose trace of Vibhatti applied during the 
Samasa process is not disappeared nor elided. As a result, the visible 
trace of vibhatti still remains in it. In the middle of this compound noun 
example Gavampati, the trace of vibhatti "am" still remains. 
[A-not+lutta-elided] 


e gavampati-the lord of cattle cn. 


Alutte'ti kimattham? What is the word “alutte” for? 

To show that the example below is inapplicable as it is a 
lutta-compound noun in which vibhatti applied after “go” 
has been elided. Hence, inapplicable. 

* gopati-the lord of cattle cn. 


Caggahanena asamase’ pi nam-vacanassa am-adeso hoti. 
Go-icce'tassa o-karassa ava'deso hoti. 


10 The word “alutte” means “unelided”. It refers to a kind of compound noun 
named “Alutta Samasa" where a vibhatti applied after a front component 
noun remains intact without being elided. Most compound nouns are called 
“Lutta Samasa" where vibhattis applied after each component nouns of a 
completed compound noun are elided. In such compounds, Lutta means 
“having its vibhatti elided". 


209 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


७८, 


By the word “ca” in Sutta, the vibhatti “narh” can also be 
changed into *am" while the component vowel “o” of the 
word “go” can morph into “ava” in non-compound-noun 

(i.e. plain noun) words. [2 functions] 

e gavam dp, gp. [avatath, two functions] 


३१. ओसरेच 


48, 3. 0 sare ca. [O+sare+ca. 3 words] 


[V] 


Go-icce'tassa okarassa ava’deso hoti samase ca sare pare. 


The vowel “o” of the front word “go”, usually changes into 
“ava” when followed by a vowel in a compound noun 
which consists of the word “20”. 

[See the examples carefully. the second component words in the exam- 
ples, rather than “go”, are vowel-initial words such as assakarh-horse, 
elakarh-sheep, ajinam-leopard] 

* gavassakarh-cow and horse cn. * gavelakam-cow and sheep cn. 


* gavajinam-cow and leopard en. (All examples are Dvanda, copula- 
tive compounds) 


Caggahanena uvanna-icce'va'mantanam linganarh 
uva,ava,ura' desà honti smim,yo, icce’tesu kvaci. 

By means of “ca” in Sutta, the component vowels “u, a” of 
the certain nouns ending in “0, ü", can sometimes morph in- 
to “uva, ava, ura" when smir and yo vibhattis are applied 
after them. (See the examples carefully) 

* bhuvi-in the earth /s [uva-function examples]. 


* pasavo-beasts np, ap. * guravo-teachers np, ap 
[Both are ava-function examples]. 
* caturo-the fours np, ap [ura-function]. 
Sare'ti kimattham? 
What is the word "sare" for? 
To show that despite being compound nouns, the examples 
shown below have no vowels. Instead, they have only con- 
sonants behind “0”. Hence, inapplicable. 


210 


७९, 


Nàma Kappa 
[See bold-faced consonants “dh, v” to clarify it] 


* godhano-the one having cows as an asset as, cn. * govindo-the 
lord of cows as, cn. 


४६. तब्बिपरीतूपपदे ब्यञ्जने च 


79, 46. Tabbiparitü' papade byanjane ca. 


[V 


] 


[Tabbiparito+tpapade+byafijane+ca. 4 words] 
Tassa ava-saddassa yada upapade titthamanassa tassa 
okarassa viparito hoti byafjane pare. 


When a consonant is being present behind, the upasagga 
word “ava” in the front, has to be conversely changed into 
“u” [as a way of grammatical morphology procedure 
known as "tabbiparita"] (ta-that, viparita-reversal). 

Summary: This Sutta changes ava into u. As a matter of morphologi- 
cal process, the “ava” is a base upasagga particle which normally 
changes into “o” (Refer to Sutta 50). Here, instead, it changes into “u”. 
This 15 called tabbiparita. This process does not occur always. Some- 
times, in some instances, the *ava" remains unchanged. See below re- 
garding the function of "ca". “u” is shown in bold. Assume that it is a 
reversely changed form of the upasagga word “ava”. 


e uggate-when arises, Is. sürlye-the sun, Js. i.e. when the sun arises, 
on sunrise. 


e uggacchati-(It) rises up av. ° uggahetva-having learnt kv, 
(gerund). 

Caggahana'mavadharana'ttham. 

[ca-gahanam-the word “ca”+avadharana-restrict+tattham=purpose] 
The word “ca” in Sutta is meant for the purpose of 
“avadharana!””, restricting the function of Sutta on the ex- 
amples below. (So, there will be two kinds of words, one being 
changed into “0” and the other remaining in the original upasagga form 


17 Avadharana is of two kinds: (1) Nivattapana’vadharapa and (2) 
Sannitthana’vadharana. Of the two, Nivattapana' vadharana restricts the 
function of Sutta while the latter affirms the function. (Nivattapana-by bar- 
ring, avadharana-to limit. Sannitthana-by affirming, avadharana-to limit). 


211 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


८० 


80, 
[४] 


~ 


of “ava” in the Buddhist texts shown below in bold). 
* avasane-in the end, finally /s. * avakirane-in scattering ls. 
* avakirati-(he) scatters av. 


१७३. गोण नंम्हि वा 
173 Gona nammhi va. [Gona*nammhi*va. 3 words] 


Sabbasse'va go-saddassa gona'deso hoti va nammhi 
vibhattimhi. 


The entire “go” sometimes changes into the new word-form 
“gona” when a catutthi, chatti plural vibhatti *nam" is ap- 
plied after it. [See the changed form shown in bold] 


* gonanam-cows gp. sattannam-seven gp, numerical adjective. 
i.e. of seven cows. 
Va’ti kimattham? 
What is the word “va” for? To show that in the examples 
shown below, the function is not applied as indicated by it. 
[There is only one example in the stanza shown by a star mark] 
Gatha (stanza) 
* gonaíi'ce taramananam, ujum gacchati pungavo. 
sabba gavi ujum yanti, nette ujum gate sati. 
taramananam-those moving, gp adj. [gonafi' ce-gonam^ce]. 
gonam-amongst cows, gp, pungavo-(the leading) male-bull ns, 
ujum-straightly nip, adv. ce-if, nip, conditional. gacchati-goes av. 
i.e. Among moving cows, if the male-bull (leading the herd) 
goes straight, (the first line ofthe verse). 


nette-(the leading) bull cls, ujurh-straightly nip, adv, gate-(when) 
going cls, sati-happens, cls. sabba-all np adj 

* gàvi-(the accompanying) cows np. ujum-straightly nip, adv. 
yanti-go, follow. av. 

i.e. When the male-bull (leading the herd) goes straight, all 
(the accompanying) cows will follow straightly. (This is an 
analogical statement which means that if a leader is in the straight moral 


212 


८१, 
81, 
[V] 


Nàma Kappa 


path without being corrupt, then others will follow suit doing the same 
thing.) 

Yogavibhagena afifiatra’pi gona'deso hoti. 

By means of yogavibaga (split-Sutta function), the word 
“go” also morphs into “gona” in cases of other compound 
noun words. (In the example below, there is another word “bhiita” 
after the word *go".) 

e gonabhütanam-(those which have been) cows. gp, cn. 


१७२. सुहिनासु च 
172. Su,hi,nà,su ca. [Su, hi, nā, sutca. 2 words] 
Su,hi,na,icce’tesu sabbassa go-saddassa gona’ deso hoti va. 


When one of “su, hi, na” vibhattis are being applied behind 
the word “go”, the entire word “go” sometimes changes in- 
to another word-form “gona”. (See the applied function shown in 
bold) 


e gonesu-cows. lp. ° gonehi ip. ° gonebhi ip. ° gonena is. 
Va'ti kimattharh? What is the word “va” for? 
To show that in the examples shown below, the function is 


not applied as restricted by it. 
* gosu Ip * gohi ip. * gobhi ip. * gavena is. 


Caggahanena sya’ disesesu pubbu'ttaravacanesu'pi 
gona,gu,gavaya desa honti. [sya’disesesu=sitadisesesu] 


By means of “ca”, the word “go” can change into “gona, 
gu, gavaya” when all the remaining vibhattis such as “si” 
etc., are applied after it. 
Note: (1) Changing into “gu” occurs for narh-vibhatti-applied “go”. 
(2) Changing into “gavaya” is only in hi-vibhatti-applied “go”. 
See the examples carefully to clarify this function. 
[gona-function] * gono ns. ० gona np. * gonam as. 
० gone ap. * gonassa ds, gs. 
e gonamha abs. ° gonamhi Js. 
[gu-function] ® gunnar dp, gp. 


213 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 
[gavaya-function] * gavayehi ip. * gavayebhi ip. 


८२, १४९. अंमो निग्गहितं झलपेहि 
82, 149. Am,mo niggahitam jha,la,pehi. 
[Arnmo+niggahitarh+jha, la, pehi. 3] 
[V] Amvacanassa ma-karassa ca jha,la,pa,icce’ tehi 
niggahitam hoti. 


Dutiya (accusative) singular “amı”, applied after “jha, la, pa- 
termed nouns” and the “m” of some compound nouns, 
changes into a “niggahita-rh”. 


Summary: This Sutta enjoins two functions: 
(1) keeping am of accusative, singular vibhatti as an am, 
(2) changing an “m” of a component word “puma (male) " in 
a compound noun into a niggahita represented by a dot. 
The purpose of first function is to show consistency of this “rh” pat- 
tern in the accusative singular cases of those jha, la, pa-termed, i, 1, u, 
ü-ending nouns without any further morphological change being ap- 
plied or occurred. 
As for the second function, it is to further transform the niggahita into 
“vagganta, the end-letter of vagga group" as prescribed in Sutta No. 31 
of the Sandhi section. 


Examples of “arm” function, 
(the first function on Masculine Gender Nouns) 
Note: All examples of both genders shown below are of as vibhatti. 


[i-ending, jha-termed nouns] * aggirh-fire. ® isim-hermit. 
* gahapatim-householder. 
[I-ending, jha-termed nouns] ० dandim-the one who has a stick. 
* mahesim-the holy Buddha. 
[u-ending, la-termed nouns] * bhikkhurh-monk. 
e patum-the skilled person. 
[ü-ending, la-termed nouns] ० sayambhurh-the self-enlightened Bud- 
dha. * abhibhum-the Buddha of over- 
powering capacities. 
(Feminine Gender Nouns) 
[i-ending, pa-termed nouns] * rattim-night. 


214 


Nama Kappa 


[I-ending, pa-termed nouns] * itthim-woman. 

[ü-ending, pa-termed nouns] ° vadhum-daughter-in-law. 

Note that only “th” is visible behind such i, 1, u, ü-ending nouns 
in accusative, singular case. 


Examples of changing “m” into niggahita 
(the second function applied after la-termed u of puma)! 
(Changed letters are shown in bold, underlined. All are compound nouns) 

e pullingam-the male-gender, male manner. [Here, m changes into 
“th” but it has to be changed into “I” by means of va of Sutta 31. This 
is an anomalous morphological procedure] 

e pumbhavo-manhood. [Here, Niggahita changes into “m” as it pre- 
cedes “bh.” These two are chatthi tappurisa compound nouns] 

e punkokilo-male Koel bird. [Here, Niggahita changes into “ñ” as it 
precedes “k”. This is a kammadhdraya compound noun] 


Morphological Process [SM] 
Pullingam=puma-malet+linga-manner (the base structure) 
Step (1) 6106 "a" of puma» pum+linga as per Sutta 222. 
Step (2) "u" of puma is termed "la" by 58. 
Step (3) By this Sutta, "m" is changed into "rn" purhtlinga 
Step (4) By "va" of 31, "m" is changed into an "1"> pullinga 
Step (5) recognize as a neuter gender noun and refer all the remaining 
procedures as explained for the word citta of the nominative singular in 
the appendex section of the volume one. 
Pumbhavo=puma+bhava 


Punkokilo=puma+kokila (masculine gender compound nouns) 
Ammo'ti kimattharh? 

What is the word *Ammo" for? 

To show that in the examples shown below are neither “du- 
tiya singular arh” nor contain an “m” in them. Hence, inap- 


18 pullingarn, pumbhavo, punkokilo’ti lato makarasamudaharanam 
पुल्लिङ्गं पुम्भावो पुंकोकिलोति लतो मकारसमुदाहरण ॥ 

(Kaccayanavannana in Devanagari). In all of these three compound- 
noun exmples, the first word is puma, not purisa. See Sutta 222. 


215 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


plicable. 

* aggina. * panina-hand. * bhikkhuna. 

* rattiya. * itthiya. * vadhuya 

(All are of is . The meaning of some words shown before are omitted). 
Jha,la,pehr'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “jha,la,pehi” for? 

To show that the examples shown below are not of jha, la, 
pa-ending nouns. So, the function is not applied as indicated 
by that word. (Those examples end in *a". So, they are not named 


jha, la, pa, but ordinary a-ending nouns in accusative case. That is why 
“ar” can still be seen clearly in them). 


* sukham-happiness. * dukkharh-suffering as. 


Puna’rambhaggahapam!? vibhasa-nivattana'ttharn. 


Including the word “jhalapehi” again in the Sutta has a pur- 
pose of affirming the function of the Sutta as being con- 
sistent for such nouns as shown below. 

e aggim. ° patum. ° buddhirh-wisdom. ® vadhum. (These words 
are already shown as examples of Sutta) 


८३, ६७. सरलोपो मादेसपच्चयादिम्हि सरलोपे तु पकति 
83, 67. Saralopo' madesa paccaya’dimhi saralope tu 
pakati. 
[Saralopo-adesa, paccaya-adimhit+saralope+tutpakati. 5 words] 
Saralopo hoti am'adesapaccaya' dimhi. saralope tu pakati 
hoti. 


[V 


(e) 


When various vibhattis such as “arm” etc., are applied and 
necessary morphological procedures are done, further pro- 


19 Puna-againtárambhaggahanarh-taking the word “jhalapehi” in the Sutta, 
vibhasa-inconsistency, nivattana-restriction*attham-has a purpose. i.e. tak- 
ing the word “jhalapehi” in the Sutta restricts the inconsistency of function. 
So, this means that the function of the Sutta in such words as those shown as 
main examples is a consistent procedure. 


216 


Nàma Kappa 


cess of eliding the vowel and keeping morphed forms of the 

word in a state of “pakati”, (i.e. keeping as it is without fur- 

ther morphological modification) is to be carried out. (This 

Sutta's function is broadly applied to all words in all chapters). 

This Sutta enjoins two functions: 

(a) the first is eliding the vowels, morphemes and affixes 
etc., which need to be elided in the course of morpholog- 
ical change of words so that it becomes a complete word. 

(b) the second is keeping a state of pakati as it is to prevent 
further action. In other words, it is like a stop-work order 
after the last major morphological procedure is done. 

e purisam-man as. ® purise-men ap. * paparh-sin as. ° pape-sins 

ap. ° papiyo-the one who is worse ns / tn. * papittho-the worst ns / 

tn. (Taddhita-nouns) 

Am'adesapaccaya'dimhir' ti kimattham? 

What is the word *am'adesapaccaya' dimhi" for? 

To show that in the example shown below, there is neither 

an “am”, nor any adesa (morphological change), so it is in- 

applicable. 

* appamado amatam padari. (This is part of a verse) 

* appamado-diligence. amatarh-of deathlessness. padath-is the 

reason. i.e. Being diligent is the reason of deathlessness (as it can lead 

to the attainment of deathless Nibbana). 

Saralope'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “‘saralope” for? To show that there is no 

procedure of eliding a vowel in the examples shown below. 

So, it is inapplicable. 

* purisassa ds, gs. * dandinam-those who have sticks dp, gp. 

Tuggahana'mavadharana' ttham. 

The word “tu” in Sutta restricts the function of Sutta in the 

examples below. (It means that in the two examples below, there is 

no elision of preceding vowels). 

* bhikkhuni-female-monk ns. * gahapatani-housewife ns. 


Pakatiggahanasamatthena puna sandhibhavo ca hoti. 


217 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


८४ 
84, 


~ 


[४] 


By means of the word *pakati" in Sutta, further Sandhi- 
action 15 possible in the examples below. 

* seyyo-the noble one ns. * settho-the noblest ns. 

* jeyyo-the senior one zs. ० jettho-the most senior ns. 


eee? ; ८८,292 


(Sandhi procedure of changing “i” into “e” and doubling of “y” occurs 
in two examples of “Seyyo” and “Jeyyo”. These four examples are 
Taddhita nouns, tn). 


१४४. अघो रस्समेकवचनयोस्वपि च 

144. Agho rassa’mekavacanayosva’pi ca. 
[Agho-rassam-ekavacanayosu-*api-ca. 5 words] 

Agho saro rassa’mapajjate ekavacana, yo-icce’tesu. 


The vowels * 1, ū” of non-gha-termed nouns ending in both 
singular and plural vibhattis, are to be shortened and made 
into rassa (short) vowels “i and u”. 
Note: The function of this Sutta is to shorten “1, ü" into “ i, 
u” for 1, ü-ending nouns in yo, ar, na, sa, sma, sa, smir, 
case-endings only. 

Example words of Feminine gender nouns. 
See all the shortened i and u in the examples shown in bold, underlined. 
[I-ending, pa-termed feminine gender nouns] ® itthirh as. 
e itthiyo np, vp, ap. ° itthiyà is, ds, abs, gs, Is. 
[ü-ending, pa-termed feminine gender nouns] * vadhum as. 
e vadhuyo np, vp, ap. ° vadhuya is, ds, abs, gs, ls. 

Example words of Masculine gender nouns. 
See all the shortened i and u in the examples shown in bold, underlined. 
[Fending, jha-termed nouns] ® dandim as. ° dandino np, ap, ds, gs,. 

e dandinà is, abs. 
[ü-ending, la-termed nouns] * sayambhum as. ° sayambhuvo np, ap,. 
० sayambhuna is, abs. 

Agho'ti kimattham? 
What is the word “agho” for? To show that examples below 
are inapplicable as they are gha-termed nouns. 
* kafifiam as. * kafifiayo np, vp, ap. * kafifiaya-girl is, ds, abs, gs, 
Is. 


218 


८५, 
85, 


[V] 


Nama Kappa 


Ekavacanayosvi'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “ekavacanayosu” for? 

To show that the examples below are inapplicable as they 
are in plural “hi”, which is excluded here. 

* itthihi ip, abp. * sayambhühi ip, abp. 


Caggahana'mavadharana'ttham. 
The word “ca” in the Sutta has the purpose of affirming the 


function of this Sutta in such examples shown below. 
(It affirms the consistency of this morphological pattern in such nouns 
throughout Buddhist texts) 


e nadirh-river as. * nadiyo np, vp, ap. * nadiyà is, ds, abs, gs, Is,. 
Apiggahanena na rassa’mapajjate. 


By the word “api” in Sutta, it debars the “rassa” procedure 


in the examples shown below. (See the vowel “T” in them remain 
unshortened. Note that they are in nominative-case “si” vibhatti. This 
pattern is a consistent one. Also see the next Sutta to affirm this fact.) 
* itthī ns. * bhikkhuni-female monk ns. 


१५०. न सिस्मिमनपुंसकानि 

150. Na sismi’manapumsakani. 
[Na+sismimn+anapumsakani. 3 words] 

Sismim anapumsakani lingani na rassa’mapajjante. 


There is no procedure of shortening into “rassa vowel" for 
masculine, feminine gender, 1, ü-ending nouns in Pathama 


66199 


singular vibhatti “51” case. (i.e. They will retain their natural long 
vowels in the nominative singular case, without being shortened. See 
the examples carefully to clarify this. The unshortened vowels are 
shown in bold, underlined) 


e itthī ns. * bhikkhuni zs. ® vadhü ns. * dandi ns. 

* sayambhü ns. 

Sismin'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “‘sismirh” for? 

To show that the examples shown below are not of vibhatti 
“si”, but of *alapana-vocative case si". So, they are inapplica- 


219 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


८६, 


ble. (So, they have their long-vowels shortened as a result of being in 
the alapana case. See the examples carefully. The shortened vowels are 
shown in bold, underlined) 
Bhoti * itthi-Oh woman! Bhoti * vadhu-Oh daughter-in-law! 
Bho * Dandi-Oh the one with stick! 
Bho * sayambhu-Oh self-enlightened Buddha! vs. 
Anapumsakant ti kimattham? 
What is the word *anapumsakani" for? 
To show that the examples below are of neuter gender. So, 
they are inapplicable here. (See shortened vowels shown in bold as 
these words are adjectives which modify their corresponding words 
such as *dànam etc.” which belong to the neuter gender. As such, the 
rule of this Sutta cannot affect these words of neuter gender.) 
* sukhakari-happiness-maker, ns, adj, danam-charitable deed ns. 
i.e. The charitable deed which creates happiness. 
* sukhakari-happiness-maker ns, adj, Stlarh-morality ns. 
i.e. The morality which creates happiness. 
* sighayayi-quickly-going, i.e. occurring ns, adj, cittam-mind ns. 
i.e. the fast-going mind, quickly occurring mind. 


२२७. उभादितो नमिन्नं 


86, 227. Ubha’dito na’minnam. 


[V] 


[Ubha-adito--nam-innam. 3 words] 
Ubha-icce'vamadito sankhyato namvacanassa innam hoti. 


The catutthi-chatti plural vibhatti * nam" applied after the 


numerical word ubha etc, changes into “innam”. 
[See the applied function shown underlined] 


e ubhinnath-of two. dp, gp. ° duvinnam-of two dp, gp (both have 
the same meaning). 

Ubhadito'ti kimattharh? 

What is the word “ubhadito” for? To show that the example 
below is *ubhaya", not *ubha". So, it is irrelevant for the 
function of this Sutta to be applied on it. 

* ubhayesath-of two dp, gp. 





220 


Nama Kappa 


८७, २३१. इण्णमिण्णन्नं तीहि सङ्क्याहि 
87, 231. Inna?! minnannam tihi sankhyahi. 


[Innam, innannamr-tihi*sankhyahi. 3 words] 


[V] Namvacanassa innam,innannam,icce’te adesa honti tihi 


८८, 
88, 


[V 


LL 


sankhyahi. 

The catutth1, chatti plural vibhatti “nar” which is applied 
after the numerical word “ti (three)", changes into “innarh, 
innannam'". [See the applied function shown in bold] 

° tinnam. ° tinpannam-of three dp, gp. (The “i” of “ti-three” is 
elided) 

Tihr ti kimattham? What is the word "tihi" for? 

To show that the example below is “dvi (two) ", not “ti 
(three) ”. So, it 1s irrelevant for the function of this Sutta to 
be applied. 

* dvinnam-of two dp, gp. 


१४७. योसु कतनिकारलोपेसु दीघं 

147. Yosu katanikaralopesu digham. 
[Yosutkata, nikara, lopesu+digharh. 3 words] 

Sabbe sara yosu katanikaralopesu digha’mapajjante. 


When pathama, alapana and dutiya plural vibhatti “yo” had 
either been changed into “ni” or elided, the vowel in front 
of “yo”, has to be made into a digha, i.e., to be lengthened. 


The examples of yo-elided nouns 

See the lengthened vowels shown in bold, underlined 
[i-ending masculine noun] * aggl-fires. np, ap. 
[u-ending masculine noun] * bhikkhü-monks. np, ap. 
[i-ending feminine noun] * ratti-nights. np, ap. 
[u-ending feminine noun] ° yagü-rice-porridges. np, ap, 
[i-ending neuter noun] * atthI-bones. np, ap. 
[u-ending neuter noun] ® ayü-lives. np, ap. 
(In these examples above, yo is elided by undergoing a lopa process as 


per Sutta No.118. After elision procedure, short “i” “u” vowels are 
lengthened by this Sutta.) 


221 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


The examples of ni-function-applied nouns of neuter gender 
(The lengthened vowels are in front of “ni” 

e atthini-bones. * àyüni-lives. 
e sabbani-all. * yani-whichever things. * tani-those. 
e kani-whatever things. ® katamani-whichever things. 
e etani-those. * amüni-so and so things. * im@ni-these. 
[All examples are of np, ap.] 
Note: In these examples, “yo” is changed into “ni” as per Sutta No. 217 
after which there is a digha procedure by this Sutta. See the length- 


6644599 


ened vowel 1 & ü in each examples located in front of “ni”, shown in 
bold. It is quite simple to understand the function of this Sutta. 
Yosvr'ti kimattham? What is the word “yosu” for? 

To show that the examples below are not of “yo”. So, they 
are inapplicable here. (All are of “si” vibhatti) 

* aggi-fire. * bhikkhu-monk. * ratti-night. * yagu-porridge ns,. 
[“si” is elided in these examples. No other specific action is needed] 

* sabbo-all. * yo-which. * so-that. * ko-who or what. 

* amuko-such and such a thing or person ns. [^si" is changed into “o” 
in these examples] 

Katanikaralopesvi ti kimattham? 

What is the word “katanikaralopesu” for? To show that in 
the examples below, there is no “ni nor lopa” function. So, 
they are inapplicable here. (yo is still seen as it is neither elided 
nor changed into ni. See Sutta 119 for * sayambhuvo) 

* itthiyo-women. * vadhuyo-daughters-in-law. 

* sayambhuvo-self-enlightened Buddhas np, vp, ap. 


Puna'rambhaggahanam kimattham"? 
Why (such a Sutta with “digha” function) is repeated again? 


Niccadipana'ttham. 

To show that this procedure is a consistent process of mor- 
phological pattern for such words. 

eagel. ebhikkhü. वात. eyani. tani. *katamani. (This is just a 
repeated display of examples shown above to confirm the consistency 
of such morphological procedure) 


222 


८९, 


Nama Kappa 


८७. सुनंहिसु च 


89, 87. Su,nam,hi,su Ca. [Su, nam, hi, su*ca. 2 words] 


[४] 


[33] 


Su,nam,hi,iccetesu sabbe sara digha’mapajjante. 


When “su, nam, hi, vibhattis” are being applied after 
nouns, the front vowel before the applied vibhattis is to be 


made into a “digha’’(lengthened). 
[To clarify this, see the long 1, ü, a, vowels in front of su, narh, hi 
vibhattis of the examples shown in bold, underlined.] 


e aggisu Ip. * agginam dp, gp. ° aggthi-fire ip, abp. 

e rattIsu Ip. ° rattinam dp, gp. ° rattIhi-night ip, abp. 

e bhikkhüsu 0. ° bhikkhünam dp, gp. ° bhikkhühi-monk ip, 
abp. * purisanam-men dp, gp. 

EtesvT ti kimattharh? 

What is the word “etesu” for? 

To indicate that in the examples below, inapplicable “na” 
vibhatti is applied. So, it is inapplicable. 

* agginà ip. * panina-hand ip. * dandina ip. 


Caggahana’ mavadharana ’ttharh. 
The nipata word “ca” in Sutta restricts the function of this 
Sutta on the examples shown below. (So, there is no digha pro- 
cess in front of “su, hi" vibhattis) 
sukhettesu-(like) good soils, ७. adj * brahmacarisu-at those who 
practice the noble Dhamma lp. 
dhamma’makkhasi bhagava 
[dhamma’ makkhasi=dhammam-+takkhasi, two words in Sandhi] 
dhammath-the noble Dhamma as. bhagava-the lord Buddha ns. 
akkhasi-taught @v. i.e. The lord Buddha taught the noble Dhamma. 
* bhikkhunam datva sakehi * panibhi. 
* bhikkhunam-to monks dp. sakehi-with one's own, ip, adj 
* panibhi-hands ip. datva-having offered kv, gerund. 
i.e. having offered to the monks by one’s own hands. 


Note: See that in the three examples shown with the mark *, there is 
no digha process. It is easily understandable. 


223 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


९०, २५२. पञ्चादीनमत्तं 

90, 252. Pafica'dina' mattam. [Pafüica-adinam-attam. 2 words] 

[V] Pafica'dinam sankhyanam anto atta'màpajjate 
su,narh,hi-iccetesu. 


When “ Su, nam, hi, vibhattis" are being applied after nu- 
merical nouns such as Pafica etc., the component vowel 
thereof has to be remained in “a”. 

Summary: This Sutta enjoins to keep the vowel “a” of 
Paííca etc as “a”. No other functions such as lengthening 


etc, are allowed. 

This is a consistent pattern of such numerical nouns from Pafica to da- 
$a. No specific change is applicable in these Vibhattis. That is why the 
vibhattis can be seen without any alteration to them or to any vowel be- 
fore them. See the underlined vibhattis. One “n” is augmented in 
"nam" vibhatti. All these examples are simple and clear to understand. 


e paficasu lp. ° paficannam dp, gp. ° paficahi-fives ip, abp. 

* chasu Jp. ° channath dp, gp. ° chahi-sixes ip, abp. 

* sattasu ७. * sattannam dp, gp. * sattahi-sevens. ip, abp. 

* atthasu Jp. * atthannam dp, gp. * atthahi-eights ip, abp. 

* navasu ७. * navannam dp, gp. * navahi-nines ip, abp. 

e dasasu lp. ° dasannath dp, gp. ° dasahi-tens ip, abp. 
Paficadima' miti kimattham? 

What is the word “Pañcaādīnarh” for? To show the examples 
shown below are inapplicable. [Paiicadina’miti- Paficadinam-iti] 

* dvisu lp. * dvinnam dp, gp. * dvihi-two ip, abp. 

(Note that in these two numerical nouns, there is a digha in front of Su, 


८८, 292 


hi, vibhattis and an extra “n” is attached to nam vibhatti though there is 
no digha in it.) 

Atta'miti bhavaniddeso ubhayassa' gamanattham. 

anto u-karo atta’mapajjate. 


By means of the bhava taddhita-suffix word “atta (refer to the 
word mattam)" in Sutta, the double “ssa” is to be inserted (at 
the front of) nam-vibhatti applied after some numeral 
nouns while the component vowel “u” of the word catu 


224 


९१, 
91, 
[V] 


83, 
92, 
[V] 


Nàma Kappa 


८८,,22 


(four) also changes into “a”. (2 Extra-functions. See “ssa” before 
nam in both examples and the “u” of catu becomes “a”, which is 
shown in bold, underlined. The function of Sutta's rule is quite simple) 


e catassannath-four, dp, gp, adj. itthinam-women dp, gp. 
* tissannam-three dp, gp, adj. vedananam-feelings dp, gp. 


१९४. पतिस्सिनीम्हि 


194. Patissi’nimhi. [Patissa+inimhi. 2 words] 
Patissa'nto atta’ mapajjate inimhi paccaye pare. 


The vowel “i” of the word “pati-lord” affixed with a femi- 


nine suffix "inr" after it, is to be changed into “a”. 
[patit+ini=pata-ini. Other morphological procedures are yet required to 
become *patanr"] 


* gahapatani-lord of the house, i.e. housewife ns. 

Inimhr'ti kimattharh? 

What is the word “inīmhi” for? 

To show that in the example below, there is no “int” affix. 
So, it is inapplicable here. 

* gahapati-lord of the house, i.e. householder, a husband ns. 


१००. न्तुस्सन्तो योसु च 

100. Ntussa’nto yosu Ca. [Ntussa+antot+yosutca. 4 words] 
Ntupaccayassa?" anto atta’mapajjate 
su,narh,hi,yo-icce’tesu paresu. 

When “su, nam, hi, yo vibhattis" are applied after a Ntu- 
suffixed nouns, the component vowel “u” of Ntu is to be 


20 Ntu affix is in fact the last part of various suffixes ending in Ntu. They are 
vantu, mantu, tavantu, avantu, tavantu. See Sutta Nos. 368, 369, 555 for 
more details. Though the last two suffixes are not directly found in 
Kaccayana grammar text, they are applied through Sutta No. 391 in Taddhita 
section. Examples of ntu-suffixed words are: Gunava, Satima, Bhuttava, 
Yavata, Kittavata etc. 


225 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


6699 


changed into an “a”. (This function is to initiate other morphologi- 
cal procedures needed for the completion of ntu-suffixed words.) 


[su] * gunavantesu-virtuous ७. 

[narh] * gunavantanam dp, gp. 

[hi] * gunavantehi ip, abp. 

[pathama-yo] * gunavanta np. [dutiya-yo] * gunavante ap. 
Ntusse'ti kimatthar? 

What is the word “ntussa” for? 

To show that the example shown below has no “ntu” affix 
in it. So, it is inapplicable. 

* jsinam-hermits dp, gp. 

EtesvT ti kimattham? What is the word “etesu” for? 

To show that the example below is of a “si” vibhatti, not of 
“su, nam, hi, yo". So it is inapplicable. 

* gunava-the virtuous one ns. 


Caggahanena aiifiesu vacanesu attafi'ca hoti. 


By means of “ca”, the same function of Sutta can also be 
applied on smim, na-vibhatti, ntu-affixed words. 


(i.e. Change “u” of ntu-suffix into an “a” in these case-endings too) 
[smirh] ° gunavantasmith Js. [na] ° gunavantena is. 


Antaggahanena ntupaccayassa anto atta" mapajjate, 
Yonai'ca ikaro hoti. (2 Functions by means of *Anta") 


By the word “anto (refer to anto out of ntuss'anto)" in Sut- 
ta, the affix “ntu” changes into “a” while the applied “yo” 
after ntu-affixed noun changes into an “i”. [^a and i” function] 
Note that this function is limited only to “yo” applied after 
the word “gunavantu (virtuous)" in the neuter gender. 


* gunavanti np. 


226 


Nama Kappa 


९३, १०६. सब्बस्स वा अंसेसु 


93, 106. Sabbassa và am,sesu. 
[Sabbassat+va+arh, sesu. 3 words] 
[V] Sabbasse’va ntupaccayassa attam hoti va arh,sa-icce’tesu. 


When “am, sa, vibhattis" are applied after a Ntu-suffixed 
noun, the whole Ntu sometimes changes into an “a”. 
Note: The second in each set of examples is inapplicable example. 
To easily understand the function of Sutta, the difference between two 
examples regarding the function being applied or not applied are shown 
in bold-faced letters. The word “va” means that there can also be some 
other form of the same word in Pali texts. It also means “in other way 
of use" which implies inconsistency of the function of Sutta. 


[arn] ° Satimarh-the one who has Sati, as, adj. bhikkhum-monk as. 
* satimantam bhikkhum va. (the same meaning, function 

not applied) 
[Explanation] ° satimarh=sati-alertness, or sati-mam-the one who 
has sati. 
In second example, mantar is of the same meaning, but function 
is not applied. [mantami-mantu*am] 

[am] ° bandhumarh-the one who has relatives as, adj. ràjanam- 
king as. 
* bandhumantam rajanam va. 

[sa] * satimassa ds, adj. bhikkhuno ds. 
* satimato ds, adj. bhikkhuno va ds. 

[sa] ° bandhumassa ds, adj. rañño ds sunkarh-tax as. 
* bandhumato ds, adj. ratio ds, va sunkam as, 
deti-(he) pays @v,. i.e. (he) pays tax to the king who has relatives. 


Etesvr'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “etesu” for? 

To show that the examples below are of “si” vibhatti. So 
they are inapplicable. 

* satimà-the one who has sati ns, adj, bhikkhu-monk ns. 

* bandhuma-the one who has relatives ns, adj, rà]à-king ns. 


227 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


९४, 
94, 
[V] 


९५, 
95, 
[V] 


१०५. सिम्हि वा 
105. Simhi va. [Simhi+va. 2 words] 
Ntupaccayassa antassa attam hoti va simhi vibhattimhi. 


When a “si” is applied after a Ntu-suffixed noun, the com- 


ponent vowel “u” of Ntu is to be changed into vowel “a”. 
(i.e. it becomes “Nta”). 


* himavanto-the one which has snow zs, adj, pabbato-mountain ns. 
i.e. the mountain which has snow (on it), the snowy mountain. 

Va'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “va” for 

To show that the function of this sutta is not applied in 
some instances even if it is of “si” vibhatti and ntu-affixed 
as restricted by the word “va” 


* himava ns, adj, pabbato ns,. 
(The same meaning as in “himavanto pabbato".) 


१४५, अग्गिस्सिनि 


145. Aggissi’ni. [Aggissa-*ini. 2 words] 
Aggiss'antassa ini-hoti va simhi vibhattimhi. 


When “si” is applied after the word “4821”, the component 
vowel “i” thereof, sometimes changes into “ini”. 


purato-from/in front abs, Is, ind, * aggini-fire ns,. 
pacchato-from/in behind abs, ls, ind, ® aggini-fire ns,. 
dakkhinato-from/at the right abs, Is, ind, * aggini-fire ns. 
vamato-from/at left abs, Is, ind, * aggini-fire ns 


Va'ti kimattham? What is the word “va” for? 
To show that the function of this sutta is not applied in 


some instances shown below as restricted by the word “va 
(So, there will be two examples of nominative singular Aggi, one with 
“ini” function and one without it in the Pali texts) 

* aggi ns. 


228 


Nàma Kappa 


९६, १४८. योस्वकतरस्सो झो 
96, 148. Yosva'katarasso jho. [Yosut+a’katarassotjho. 3 words] 
[V] Yosu akatarasso jho atta’ mapajjate. 


When pathama, alapana and dutiya plural vibhatti “yo” are 
applied after jha-termed, i-ending nouns, the component 
vowel “i” thereof, which is also an *'akatarassa", i.e. natural 


6699 


short vowel, changes into an “a”. 


(This Sutta changes “i” into “a” for those “i-ending jha-termed nouns 
in “yo” vibhatti. See “a” in examples shown in bold, underlined, to clar- 


ify it.) 





e aggayo-fires. ° munayo-sages. * Isayo-hermits. 

* gahapatayo-householders np, vp, ap. 

Yosvr'ti kimattharh? 

What is the word “yosu” for? 

To show that the example below is inapplicable as it is of 
“su” vibhatti. 

* aggisu-fire Ip. 


Akatarasso’ti kimattham? 

What is the word “akatarasso” for? 

To show that the example below is inapplicable as the vow- 
el “i” in it is a “katarassa, i.e. not a natural rassa, but mor- 
phologically shortened rassa". 


* dandino-those who have sticks np, vp, ap. 


Jho'ti kimattharh? 
What is the word “jho” for? 
To show that the example below is inapplicable as the vow- 


el “i” in it is not a “jha-termed one". (the vowel “i” in it is a 
“pa-termed one"). 
* rattiyo-the nights np, vp, ap. 
Note: kata-done, made morphologically-rassa-short vowel. i.e. intentionally 
changed short vowel. 
Akatarassa=na-not+kata-done+rassa-short vowel. i.e. natural short 
vowel. (The nipata particle na-changed into “a”) 


229 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


९७, १५६. वेवोसु लो च 
97, 156. Ve,vo,su lo ca. [Ve, vo, su+lo+ca. 3 words] 
[V] Ve,vo,icce’tesu akatarasso lo atta’mapajjate. 
When “morphed form ve, vo" is present after a natural rassa 


८८,,22 


“u-ending noun", that vowel “u” changes into “a”. (The func- 


८८1, 22 


tion of this Sutta changes “u” into “a” for those u-ending, la-termed 
nouns. See “a” shown in bold, underlined) 


e bhikkhave- Oh monks ! vp. ° bhikkhavo-monks vp, np, ap. 

* hetave-Oh reasons! vp. * hetavo-reasons vp, np, ap. 
Akatarasso'ti kimattham? 

What is the word *akatarasso" for? 

To show that the examples below are inapplicable as the 
vowel “0” in them is a “katarassa, i.e. not a natural rassa, 
but morphologically shortened rassa". 

* sayambhuvo-Self-enlightened Buddhas np. 

* vessabhuvo-Buddhas named Vessabhü np. 

* parabhibhuvo-those who can overwhelm others np. 


Vevosvi ti kimattham"? 

What is the word *vevosu" for? 

To show that the examples below are inapplicable as they 
have no “ve, vo" function in them. 

* hetuna-reason is. * ketuna-banner is. * setuna-bridge is. 


Caggahana’manukaddhana’ttham. 
[ca-gahanam-anukaddana-pulling-*attham-purpose] 

The word “ca” in Sutta has a purpose of pulling, i.e. taking 
“a-changing function" of preceding Sutta toward this Sutta. 
(That is why this Sutta is a bit similar in changing “u” into an “a”. The 


८८५११ 


preceding Sutta changes “i” into an “a” though). 








230 


Nama Kappa 


९८, १८९. मातुलादीनमानत्तमीकारे 
98, 189. Matula’dina’manatta’mikare. 
[Matula-adinarh+anattamtikare. 3 words] 
[V] Matula-icce’vamadinarh anto anatta’mapajjate 1-kare 
paccaye pare. 


The last component vowel “a” of r-affixed feminine gender 
nouns such as matula and so forth, changes into “ana”. 
[àna-r- ani] 

Summary: This Sutta changes the last “a” into “ana” for r-affixed fem- 
inine gender nouns such as matula=matulanat > matulani. 

See this function shown in bold, underlined. 


e matulanI-aunt ns. * ayyakani-madam, or an honorable lady . ns. 
e varunani-a medium woman or wife of a deity named Varuna, ns. 


Ikare'ti kimattha? What is the word “kare” for? 

To show that the examples below are inapplicable as they 
have no “1” in them. (They have only an "in?" affix) 

* bhikkhuni-female monk ns. * ràjini-princess or a lady of royal 
blood ns. * jalini-a divine being so-named ns. 

* gahapatàni-housewife ns. 


Anattaggahanena nadi-icce’tassa di-saddassa jjo,jja-adesa 
honti saha vibhattiya yo,nà,sa-icce tesu. 


By means of the word “anatta” in Sutta, the component 
word “dr” of the word “nadi (river)" changes into “jjo, jja” 
together with vibhattis “yo, na, sa”, which are applied after 
“nadY’. [yo>jjo. na, sa>jja] 
See the effect of function shown in bold. 
[yo] * najjo sandanti. [najjo-the rivers np. sandanti-flow av, i.e. The 
rivers flow] 
[na] * najjà katarh tarangam. 
[najja-by the river is. katarh-done kv. tarangam-wave ns. 
i.e. The river-caused wave. (Kita verb in Passive voice) 
[sa] * najjà nerafijaraya tire. 
[najja-of river gs. nerafijaraya-named nerañjarā gs, adj. tire-on the 
bank Js . i.e. on the bank of the river named Nerafijara] 


231 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


९९, ८१. स्माहिस्मिनं म्हाभिम्हि वा 
99, 8]. Sma,hi,esmim,nam mha,bhi,mhi va. 
[Sma, hi, smim, narn+mha, bhi, mhi+va. 3] 
[V] Sabbato lingato sma,hi,smirh iccetesam mha,bhi,mhi- 
icce'te adesa honti va yathasankhyarh. 


The “sma, hi, smir” vibhattis which are applied after all 
masculine and neuter gender nouns, sometimes changes in- 
to “mha, bhi, mhi" respectively. [sma>mha. hi>bhi, 
smim>mhi] 

Note: The functions are shown in bold. The second example in each 
pair is inapplicable. Hence, the applied vibhattis remain unchanged in 
them. See those unchanged vibhattis shown underlined. 


[sma] ° purisamha. * purisasma-from man abs. 

[hi] * purisebhi. * purisehi-by/with men ip, abp. 

[smirn] ° purisamhi. * purisasmirh-in men Js. 
Sma,hi,smimna' miti kimattham? 

What is the word “sma, hi, smimnam" in Sutta for? 

To show that the examples below are inapplicable as they 
are not of “sma, hi, smith” vibhattis. 

* vannavantam-that which has beautiful look as, adj 

* agandhakarh-that which has no fragrance as, adj 

* virulhapupphath-a fully-blooming flower as, cn. 

i.e. Beautiful, non-fragrant, fully blooming flower. 

[mahantam-big as, adj. chattarh-umbrella as] * mahachattam 
big umbrella as, cn. 

[mahantarh-big as, adj. dhajarh-banner as.] * mahadhajam-big 
banner as, cn. 

Note: The words within brackets are called ED or viggaha, not exam- 
ples. Such EDs will be found in Samasa, Taddhita, Kita and Unadi 
chapters frequently. 


232 


Nama Kappa 


१००, २१४. न तिमेहि कताकारेहि 
100, 214. Na ti mehi kata" karehi. 
[Natta, imehi+kata-akarehi. 3 words] 
[V] Ta,ima, icce’tehi katakarehi sma,smim,nam 
mha,mhi icce'te adesa ne'va honti. 


After Sabbanama nouns such as “ta (that) and ima (this)" are 
being changed into “a”, the sma, smim vibhattis applied af- 
ter them, are never to be changed into “mha, mhi". 
[See Sutta No. 176-177 to understand changing into “a’] 
The function of Sutta keeps those sma, smirh vibhattis as it is. Hence, 
there are no “amha, amhi" word-forms applicable in the ablative and 
locative singular cases. In the examples shown below, “sma, smith” 
vibhattis are shown in unaltered states in bold, underlined. 


e asma-from that abs. thana-place abs. bhayarh-fear ns. uppa- 
jjati-arises av. i.e. fear arises from that place. 

e asmim Zs thane-at that place Is. bhayarh-fear ns. titthati-exists 
av. i.e. fear stands/exists at that place. 

e asmáà-from that, from this abs. e asmirh-at that, at this Is. (These 
are plain examples without any contextual word) 

Katakarehr'ti kimattharh? 

What is the word “katakarehi” for? 

To show that the examples below are inapplicable as they 
do not have any morpheme “a” derived from “ta, ima". So, 
“mha, mhi" functions are seen in them being applied. 
[See “mha, mhi" in examples shown underlined.] 

* tamha-from that abs. * tamhi-at/in that fs. 

* imamha-from this abs. * imamhi-at/in this Zs. 


१०१, ८०. सुहिस्वकारो ए 
101, 80. Su,hi,sva’karo e. [Su, hi, suta’karote. 3 words] 
[V] Su,hi,icce’tesu akaro etta’mapajjate. 


66,99 


The component vowel “a” of nouns changes into an “e 


when “su, hi" vibhattis are applied after nouns. [See the ex- 
amples. The “e” in front of Vibhatti “su, hi? is shown in bold, under- 


233 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


lined. This function is quite a consistent morphological pattern usually 


found in all a-ending nouns of masculine and neuter genders. | 


[su] * sabbesu-all ७. ° yesu-in which Jp. ° tesu-in that lp. 
e kesu-at what lp. * purisesu-in men Ip. * imesu-in this lp. 
e kusalesu-in wholesome deeds lp. * tumhesu-in you lp. 
e amhesu-in us lp. 

[hi] * sabbehi ip, abp. * yehi ip. * tehi ip, abp. * kehi ip, abp. 
* purisehi ip, abp. * imehi ip, abp. * kusalehi ip, abp. 
* tumhehi ip, abp. * amhehi ip, abp. 





$03, २०२. सब्बनामानं नंम्हि च 
102, 202. Sabbanamanam nammhi ca. 
[Sabbanamanam-nammhi-ca. 3 words] 
[V] Sabbesam sabbanamanam anto akaro etta’ mapajjate 
nammhi vibhattimhi. 


The last component vowel “a” of Sabbanama nouns before 
the applied vibhatti "nam", changes into “e”. 
[Sabbanama nouns are sabba, ya, ta, ka and so on. See the examples 


66.१? 


carefully. *e" is shown in bold, underlined. The “sath, sanam" after “6” 
are morphed forms derived from the “nam” vibhatti. Hence, it is invisi- 
ble] 


[sabba-all] ® sabbesam. ० sabbesanam. 

[ya-which] ° yesam. ° yesanam. 

[ta-that] ° tesarn. ® tesanam. 

[ima-this] * imesam. ® imesanam. ° kesam. ° kesanam. 

[itara-other] ® itaresarh-others. * itaresanarh-others, 

[katama-what] ० katamesarh-of which ones. ० katamesanam-of 
which ones. All examples are dp, gp 

Sabbanamana’miti kimattham? 

What is the word *sabbanamanam" for? 

To show that examples below are inapplicable as they are 

not sabbanama nouns. 

* buddhànam * bhagavantanam acinnasamacinno. 

* buddhànam-Buddhas gp * bhagavantanarh-those having six 


234 


Nàma Kappa 


glories called “bhaga”, gp, adj, Acinnasamacinno-(is) habitually 
done sacred custom nv. 

i.e. (It) is a habitually done sacred custom of Buddhas who have six 
glories called as “bhaga”. 

Akaro'ti kimattham? 

What is the word *akaro" for? 

To show that examples below are inapplicable as they have 
no "akara-the letter-a" in them, but “ii” instead. 

* amüsam . * amuisanarh- of so and so people or things dp, gp. 
Nammhr'ti kimattham"? 

What is the word *nammhi" for? 

To show that examples below are inapplicable as they are 
of “yo”, not of "nam". 

* sabbe-all np, ap. * ime-these np, ap. 


Caggahana’manukaddhana’ttham. 
The word “ca” in Sutta has a purpose of pulling in “e-changing func- 
tion” from the preceding Sutta No.101 (to this Sutta). 


१०३, ७९. अतो नेन 
103, 79. Ato ne’na. [Ato+nā+ena. 3 words] 
[V] Tasma akarato navacanassa ena’deso hoti. 


The vibhatti “na” applied after a-ending nouns (of masculine 
& neuter genders), changes into “ena”. [See examples in their origi- 
nal form of a-endings shown in bracket. The “619” is shown in bold, 
underlined] 


[sabba] ° sabbena-with all. [ya] ° yena-with which. 

[ta] * tena-with that. [ka] * kena-with what. 

[ima] ° anena-with this. [ima-changes into “ana” by Sutta No.171] 
[purisa]  purisena-with man. 

[rüpa] ° rüpena-with form, or any physical matter. 

(All are a-ending nouns in is) 

Ato’ti kimattham? 

What is the word “ato” for? 

To show that examples below are inapplicable as they end 


235 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


in “i-u”. So, the vibhatti is kept as it is without being 

changed into “ena”. [See Vibhatti “na” in the examples below 

which is shown underlined] 

[muni] * muninà-sage is. (This is an i-ending noun) 

[amu] * amuna-so and so person or thing is. 

[Bhikkhu] * bhikkhuna-monk is. (These are u-ending nouns. So they 

are inapplicable) 

Na’ti kimattharn? What is the word “na” for? 

To show that example below is inapplicable as it is of 
sma”, not of “na” 

* tasma-from that abs. 


१०४, ६६. सौ 
104, 66. So’. [Si*o. 2 words] 
[V] Tasma akarato sivacanassa okara'deso hoti. 


८८ ११ 


The Pathama singular vibhatti 


nouns (of masculine & Neuter gender), is to be changed into 
[See examples, The applied function “0” 15 shown in bold-face] 


applied after a-ending 


6699 


e sabbo-all ns. * yo-which ns. ® SO-that ns. ® Ko-who or what ns. 
e amuko-such and such a person, thing etc. ms. * puriso-man ns. 
Sr'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “si” for? To show that the example below 
is inapplicable as it is of "nam", not of "si". 

* purisanam- of men dp, gp. 

Ato'ti kimattharh? 

What is the word “ato” for? 

To show that the example below is inapplicable as it does 
not end in an “a”, but ends in “Ñ” 

* sayambhü ns. 


236 


Nama Kappa 


१०५, ०. सोवा 
105,. ..S0 và. [Sotva. 2 words] 
[V] Tasma a-karato navacanassa so-adeso hoti va. 


The vibhatti “na” applied after a-ending nouns, changes 
into “so”. [This Sutta changes “na” into “so”. Such examples are 
widely found in the Buddhist texts used as either adjective or adverb. 
See the applied function shown in bold, underlined] 


e atthaso dhammam janati. 

[Trans] * atthaso-by means of meaning is. dhammarh-the Dhamma 
or Pali as. janati-(he) knows àv. i.e. He knows the Dhamma by means 
of understanding the meaning. 

e byafijanaso attharh janati. 

[Trans] * byafijanaso-by means of words is...attham-the meaning 
as...janati-(he) knows dy. i.e. He knows the meaning by means of un- 
derstanding the words. 

* akkharaso-by letter. ० suttaso-by Sutta (discourse). ० padaso-by 
word. * yasaso-by fame. ० upayaso-by logic or method. 

* sabbaso-by all means. * thamaso-by capacity. 

* thanaso-by the right reason, reasonably. (All are of is) 

Va’ ti kimattham? 

What is the word “va” for? 

To show that in examples below, the function of Sutta is in- 
applicable as implied by that word “va”. (That is why there is 
no “so” in three examples. Instead, the applied “na” becomes “ena” as 
per Sutta 103). 

* padena va * padarahena va * atirekapadena va 

yo bhikkhu * theyyacittena parassa bhandam ganhati, 

so bhikkhu parajiko hoti asamvaso. 

* padena va-either by a quarter * padarahena va-or by a quarter's 
worth. * atirekapadena va-or in excess of a quarter’s worth. 

yo bhikkhu-whoever monk. * theyyacittena-with an intent to steal. 
parassa-of other. bhandam-belonging. ganhati-(if) takes. 

so bhikkhu-that monk. parajiko-the one who is defeated, fallen 


from monk's sacred life. hoti-is. asamvaso-the one who doesn't 
have any more monastic communion. 


237 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


i.e. Whoever a monk, with the intent of stealing, takes other's belonging 
(which 15) either mere a quarter (in terms of cash) or a quarter's worth 
or in excess of it, he is defeated from monkhood and has no more 
shared monastic conduct (communion) with other good monks. (i.e. de- 
frocked) 


१०६, ३१३. दीघोरेहि 
106, 313. Digho'rehi. [Digha, orehi. 1 word] 
[V] Digha,ora, icce'tehi smavacanassa so-adeso hoti va. 


The vibhatti “sma” applied after the words “digha and ora" 
sometimes changes into “so”. [Function shown in bold] 


e dighaso-by terms of length abs. * oraso-by this side abs. 
* dighamha-from length abs. * oramha-from this side abs. 
(Both are inapplicable examples) 
Dighorehi'ti kimattham? 
What is the word “dīghorehi” for? To show that in the ex- 
amples below, the function of Sutta is inapplicable as they 
are not “digha, and ora". 
* saramha-from vowel or from sound, abs. 
* vacanamha-from speech, abs. 


१०७, ६९. सब्बयोनीनमाए 

107, 69. Sabbayonina’ma-e. [Sabba-yonmarh+a-e. 2 words] 

[V] Tasma akarato sabbesam yo,ninam a-e-adesa honti và 
yathasankhyam. 


The vibhatti “yo” and a morpheme “ni” applied after all a- 
ending nouns are to be changed into “a” and “e” respective- 


ly. [This Sutta changes yo and ni into à and e, which is shown under- 
lined] 


Masculine Gender, a-ending noun Examples 
* purisà-men np. * purise ap. (In these examples of masculine gen- 
der nouns, nominative, vocative plural *yo" changes into à and accusa- 
tive plural *yo" changes into e) 


238 


Nàma Kappa 


Neuter Gender, a-ending noun Examples 
* rupa-form or matters np. ° rüpe ap. (In these examples of neuter 
gender nouns, all “yo” is to be first changed into “ni” and that “ni” 
changes into “a” for nominative and vocative cases and into “e” for ac- 
cusative plural case. Please note this specific fact carefully) 
Va'ti kimattharh? What is the word “va” for? 
To show that in the examples below, the function of Sutta is 
inapplicable as implied by that word “va”. 
* aggayo. * munayo. * isayo. (See Sutta 96 for these examples.) 


Yoninan'ti kimattham? What is the word *yoninam" for? 
To show that in examples below, there is no “900 ni" as 
required by this Sutta. Hence, inapplicable. 

* purisassa-of man ds, gs. * rüpassa-of matter ds, gs. 


Akarato'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “akarato” for? To show that the examples 
below do not end in “a”, i.e. not a-ending nouns. So, inap- 
plicable. (They end in * 1 & i") 

* dandino-those having sticks np. [dandi-this noun ends in T] 

* atthini-bones np. * aggī-fire (s) np. pajjalanti-shine ay. i.e. The 
fires shine (are aflame). * munt-sages np. caranti-move dy. i.e. The 
sages move. [atthi, aggi, muni, these three nouns end in i.] 


१०८, ९०. स्मास्मिनं वा 

108, 90 Sma,smimnam VA. [Sma, smirnnam-và. 2 words] 

[V] Tasma akarato sabbesam sma,smim icce’tesarh 4,e-adesa 
honti và yathasaükhyam. 


The two “sma, smirh vibhattis" applied after a-ending 
nouns of masculine and neuter gender, sometimes changes 
into “a and e" respectively. [sma>a. smim?e] 

See à & e shown in bold, underlined. The second in each pair is inap- 
plicable. That is why there are the applied vibhattis still visible in them. 


e purisa. * purisasma-from man abs. 
e purise. * purisasmim-in man Js. 


239 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


Akarato'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “akarato” for? To show that in examples 
below, the function of Sutta is inapplicable as they do not 
end in “a”. (They end in * 1 & u”) 

* dandinà is, abs. “ dandismim Is. [dandi, this noun ends in 1] 

* bhikkhuna is, abs. * bhikkhusmim /s. [bhikkhu, this noun ends 
in u] 


१०९, ३०४. आय चतुत्येकवचनस्स तु 

109, 304. Aya catutthe'kavacanassa tu. 
[Aya+catutthi-ekavacanassa+tu. 3 words] 

[V] Tasma akarato catutthe’kavacanassa aya’deso hoti va. 


(To express a purpose or a benefit or a result of an action) 
the catutthi singular vibhatti “sa” (which is applied after a- 
ending nouns of masculine and neuter genders), is to be 
changed into an “aya”? sometimes. [sa>aya] 


Note: This Sutta changes dative singular “sa” applied after a-ending 
masculine and neuter gender nouns into “aya. Such word forms in 


ea 


aya" express the purpose or benefit or result. 

It is widely used in the canonical texts. See the examples carefully. 
The function aya is shown in bold, underlined to make it easily notice- 
able and understandable. 


e atthaya-for benefit, ds. * hitaya-for wellbeing, ds. * sukhaya-for 
happiness. ds. devamanussanath-of deities and men. gp. buddho- 
Buddha, ns. loke-in the world. /s. uppajjati-arises, emerges. av. [at- 
tha-benefit, hita-wellbeing, sukha-happiness. All are a-ending nouns] 
i.e. The Buddha appears in the world for benefit, for the wellbeing and 
for the happiness of deities and men. 

Ato'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “ato” for? To show that in the examples 
below, the function of Sutta is inapplicable as it does not 
end in “a”. (It ends in 1”) 

* isissa-of hermit ds, gs. [Isi-this noun ends in i] 

Catutthr'ti kimattham? 

What is the word * catutthi ” for? To show that the example 


240 


Nàma Kappa 


below is of a "chatti vibhatti". So, it is inapplicable. 
* purisassa-of man gs. mukhath-face ns. i.e. man’s face. 


Ekavacanasse'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “ekavacanassa” for? 

To show that the example below is of plural *nam" vibhatti, 
not of ekavacana (singular). So, it is inapplicable. 

* purisanam dp. dadati-(he) gives av. i.e. He gives to men. 


Va'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “va” for? To show that in the examples 
below, the function of Sutta is inapplicable as being re- 
stricted by it. 

data hoti * samanassa va * brahmanassa va. 

* samanassa ds và nip-either to the monk * brahmanassa ds và 
nip-or to a Brahmin. data-giver ns, kn. hoti-is av. (Here, double use 


a? 


of nipata word “va” is equal to "either or".) 
i.e. (He) is the donor either to monk or Brahmin. 


Tuggahanena tthafi’ca hoti. [tthafi’ca=ttharhtca] 


By means of the word “tu” in Sutta, the catutthr singular 
vibhatti “sa” also changes into “tthamh”. 

Note: See “ttharh” shown in bold, underlined. This word form too is 
widely used in scriptures including this Pali grammar text. See, for 
example, “Vati kimattham?". 

Kimattham-kim-attham, kimm-what+attham-for purpose, benefit? 

* atthattharh-for benefit. * hitattharh-for the wellbeing. 

e sukhatthari-for happiness. All ds. 


220, २०१. तयो नेव च सब्बनामेहि 


110, 201. Tayo ne'va ca sabbanamehi. 
[Tayotnatevatcatsabbanamehi. 5 words] 
[V] Tehi sabbanamehi akara’ntehi sma,smim,sa-icce'tesam 
tayo 4,e,aya’desa ne'va honti. 


Three functions of changing “sma, smirh, sa" vibhattis into 
“ 8, e, aya" are inapplicable for a-ending Sabbanama nouns. 


241 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


Note: This Sutta debars three functions: changing sma into “a”, smim 
into "e", sa into “aya” in a-ending Sabbanama nouns. See the examples 
carefully to clarify this injunction. Practically, this Sutta restricts the 
function of Sutta No.108, and 109 in Sabbanama nouns. In other words, 
the most Venerable Great Grammarian states that in a-ending masculine 
and neuter gender Sabbanama nouns, there are no word-forms in sma, 
smir, sa vibhatti cases which have “a, e, aya" functions. [See all ex- 
amples with unaltered vibhattis shown underlined.] 


* sabbasma-from all abs. ° sabbasmith-in all Is. 

* sabbassa-of all ds, gs. 

e yasma-from which. abs. * yasmim. Is ° yassa. ds,gs 

* tasma-from that. abs. ° tasmim. Is ० tassa. ds,gs 

e kasma-from what. abs. ° kasmir. Is ० kassa. ds, gs 

e imasma-from this. abs. * imasmim. Is * imassa. ds, gs 


(The meaning of examples are easily understandable as shown in the 
first example) 








Sabbanamehr'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “‘sabbanamehi” for? 

To show that in examples below, the restriction of this Sutta 
is inapplicable as they are not Sabbanama nouns. (That is why 
they are seen in “A, e, aya" procedures.) 

* papa-from sin or evil abs. * pape-in sin or evil Is. 

* papaya-for accruing sin or evil ds. 


Caggahana’manukaddhana’ttham. 

The word “ca” in the Sutta has a purpose of pulling in the 
word “ato” which comes from Suttas 103 all the way up to 
104, 105,107, 108, 109 and 110 and withholding it here in 


this Sutta. What does it mean? It means that in the forthcoming Sut- 
tas, the function is generally focused on other nouns rather than a- 
ending nouns. 


242 


Nama Kappa 


१११, १७९. घतो नादीनं 

11 l, 179. Ghato na’dinam. [Ghato+nā-ādīnarn. 2 words] 

[V] Tasmā ghato na'dina' mekavacananam vibhattigananam 
aya'deso hoti. 


All five singular “na, sa, sma, sa, smim" vibhattis applied 
after a-ending feminine gender nouns, change into “aya”. 
Note: This means that in all na, sa, sma, sa, smim vibhatti- 
applied cases of a-ending feminine nouns, there will be the 
same word form marked by an “aya”. See the examples 
carefully to familiarize with word-forms of a-ending nouns 
of feminine gender. Also note that only those * marked are 
examples, the rest are predicates which complements the 
sentence. [See “aya” function shown underlined in the examples be- 
low.] 


[na] * kafifiaya-by girl is. katarh-done kv. kammarh-deed as. 
i.e. The deed done by girl. (Passive voice) 

[sa] ° kafifiaya-to the girl ds. diyate-is given av. i.e. the girl is given 
(something by somebody) 

[sma] * kafifiaya-from girl abs. nissatarh-came off, dropped kv. vat- 
tharh-the dress ns. i.e. the cloth which comes off (slipped off) 
from the (body of) girl. 

[sa] * kafifiaya-of girl gs. pariggaho-possession ns, ny. i.e. the girl's 

possession. 

[smith] ° kafifiaya-in girl /s. patitthitam-stood. kv. silam-virtue ns. 

i.e. The virtue exists in girl. 

Ghato'ti kimattharh? 

What is the word “ghato” for? To show that in the examples 

below, the function of Sutta is inapplicable as they are not 

“gha-termed” a-ending nouns. (They are nouns ending in i, 1, u, a. 

Ratti, Ittht, Dhenu, Vadht) 

* rattiya. * itthiya. * dhenuya. * vadhuya. (All are is, ds, 
abs, gs, ls. The meaning of examples shown before) 

Na'dina'miti kimattham? 

What is the word “nadinarh” for? 


243 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


To show that in examples below, the function of Sutta is in- 


applicable as they are not of applicable vibhatti. (They are of 
am vibhatti) 


* kafifiarh-the girl, as. passati (he) sees av. i.e. (he) sees the girl. 

* vijjam-knowledge. * vInath-the harp. रै gangam-the river Gan- 
ges. (All are as) 

Ekavacanana'miti kimattham? 

What is the word *ekavacananam" for? To show that in ex- 
amples below, the function of Sutta is inapplicable as they 
are in plural “su” vibhattis. 

* sabbasu. * yasu. * tasu. * kasu-at what. * imasu. 

* pabhasu-lights. (All are lp, a-ending sabbanàma nouns of feminine 
gender) 


११२, १८३. पतो या 

112, 183. Pato ya. [Pato+ya. 2 words] 

[V] Tasma pato na’dina’mekavacananam vibhattigananam 
ya-adeso hoti. 


All five singular “na, sa, sma, sa, smim vibhattis" applied 
after ^i, 1, u, ü-ending" feminine gender nouns, are to be 
changed into “ya”. 


Note: This means that in all na, sa, sma, sa, smim vibhatti- 
applied cases of i, 1, u, ü-ending feminine gender nouns, 
there will be the same word-form marked by a “ya”. See the 


[1 PE) 


examples. “ya” is shown underlined. 


e rattiya. ° itthiya. ० deviyà-queen or female divine being. 

e dhenuya. ° yaguya-porridge. ° vadhuya. 

(All examples are is, ds, abs, gs, Is) 

Na'dina' miti kimattham? 

What is the word *nadinam" for? To show that in examples 
below, the function of Sutta is inapplicable as they are not 
of “na etc." vibhatti. 

* rattī ns. * rattim as. * itthī ns. * itthim as. 


244 


Nama Kappa 


Pato'ti kimattharh? 

What is the word “pato” for? To show that in the examples 
below, the function of Sutta is inapplicable as they are not 
*pa-termed" nouns, but are gha-termed nouns. 

* kafifiaya. * vinaya. * gangaya. * pabhaya-light. 

* sobhaya-beauty or allure. (All examples are 4-ending nouns in is, 
ds, abs, gs, ७). 

Ekavacanana'miti kimattham? 

What is the word *ekavacananam" for? To show that in the 
examples below, the function of Sutta is inapplicable as 
they are not singulars (ekavacana), but plurals (dative and 
genitive plurals). 

* rattinam dp, gp. * itthinam dp, gp. 


११३, १३२. सखतो गस्से वा 
113, 132. Sakhato gasse’ va. 
[Sakhato-gassa-e--va. 4 words] 
[V] Tasma sakhato gassa akara,akara,ikara,Ikara,ekara’ desa 
honti và. 


An Alapana (vocative) “si vibhatti" formally termed “ga” 
and applied after the word sakha (friend), changes into “4, a, 
i, I, e". (This Sutta changes "si" applied after a-ending, masculine, 
vocative-case word “sakha-friend” into “a, à, i, 1, e". See examples 
carefully. The function-applied vowels are shown underlined). 


bho ° sakha! bho ° sakha! bho ° sakhi! bho ° sakhi! 

bho * sakhe!-Oh friend! vs. 

(All examples are of the same meaning, vs. “bho” is a vocative prefix 
used before male gender nouns when addressing the male. “bho” is a 


derivative morpheme of the word bhavanta which means “your honor- 
able”.) 


245 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


११४, १७८. घते च 

114, 178. Ghate’ ca. [Ghatotetca. 3 words] 

[V] Tasma ghato gassa ekara'deso hoti. 
The Alapana (vocative) “si vibhatti" formally termed “ga” 
and applied after a-ending feminine gender nouns, changes 


into “e”. (This Sutta changes “vocative case-si" applied after feminine 


gender, vocative-case, gha-termed, a-ending nouns such as “ayya- 
madam” into an “e”. See the examples. “e” is shown underlined). 
bhoti * ayye! bhoti ® kafifie! bhoti ® kharadiye! vs. 

(Refer to Sutta No. 57 for these examples) 
Caggahana'mavadharana'ttham sannitthanam. 

The word “ca” in Sutta has a purpose of re-affirming the 
function of Sutta as a consistent morphological pattern. 


११५, १८१. न अम्मादितो 
1 15, 181. Na amma’ dito. [Natamma-adito. 2 words] 
[V] Tato amma'dito gassa ekarattam na hoti. 


The Alapana (vocative-case) “si” formally termed “ga” and 
applied after the word *amma (mother)" etc, is not to be 
changed into “e”. (This Sutta debars function of “e”, in vocative 
noun word “amma” etc. Therefore, there is an “a” in the examples be- 


low shown in bold, underlined.) 

bhoti e amma! bhoti ® anna.!bhoti ° amba! bhoti ® tata!-Oh 
mother! vs (All are of the same meaning). 

Ammadito'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “ammadito” for? To show that in example 
below, the function of Sutta is inapplicable as it is not the 
word “amma” etc. 

bhoti * kafifie!-Oh girl! vs. 


246 


Nama Kappa 


११६, १५७. अकतरस्सा लतो य्वालपनस्स वेवो 

116, 157. Akatarassa lato yva'lapanassa ve,vo. 
[Akatarassa+latot+yo-alapanassa+ve, vo. 4 words] 

[V] Tasma akatarassa lato yva'lapanassa ve,vo-adesa honti. 


The Alapana (vocative) plural “yo” applied after “natural 
u-ending nouns", changes into “ve, vo". (Natural “0” 


means not morphologically shortened *u".) 

This Sutta changes vocative, plural “yo” applied after natural short 
vowel u-ending masculine gender nouns into *ve and vo" which is 
shown underlined below. 


* bhikkhave. * bhikkhavo. * hetave. * hetavo vp. (Refer to Sutta 
No. 97 for other necessary function) 

Akatarassa’ti kimattham? 

What is the word “akatarassa” for? To show that in the ex- 
ample below, the function of Sutta is inapplicable as it is 
not “akata-rassa, i.e. natural rassa”, but is a “katarassa-i.e. 
morphologically altered rassa". 

* sayambhuvo np, ap. (Refer to Sutta 119). 


Lato'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “lato” for? To show that in the examples 
below, the function of Sutta is inapplicable as they are not 
la-termed nouns. (They are pa-termed feminine gender 
nouns, hence irrelevant and inapplicable) 

* nagiyo-female-dragons np, vp, ap. * dhenuyo-cows. np, vp, ap. 
* yaguyo-porridges np, vp, ap. 

Alapanasse'ti kimattharn? 

What is the word *alapanassa" for? To show that in the ex- 
amples below, the function of Sutta is inapplicable as they 
are not alapana (vocative). (The examples are statement in nomi- 
native plural *yo") 

te-those np, ap, adj * hetavo-reasons, np, ap. i.e. those reasons. 
te-those np, ap, adj * bhikkhavo-monks, np, ap. i.e. those monks. 


247 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


११७, १२४. झलतो सस्स नो वा 
117, 124. Jhalato sassa no VA. [Jhalato+sassatno+va. 4 words] 
[V] Tasma jhalato sassa vibhattissa no-adeso hoti va. 


The catutthi and chatti singular (dative and genitive) “sa 
vibhatti" applied after “i, 1, u, ü-ending nouns", sometimes 
changes into “no”. [This Sutta changes “sa” into “no”. See “no” 
shown underlined below. The second one in each pair is inapplicable 
example.] 


[1] * aggino. * aggissa ds, gs. 

[1] * sakhino. * sakhissa ds, gs. 

[1] * dandino. * dandissa 4s, gs. 

[u] ° bhikkhuno. * bhikkhussa ds, gs. 

[ti] ° sayambhuno. * sayambhussa ds, gs. (The meaning of ex- 
amples shown before.) 

Sasse'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “sassa” for? To show that in the examples 

below, the function of Sutta is inapplicable as they are not 

of “sa”, but of “na” vibhatti. (See “na” vibhatti shown underlined 

below.) 

* isina is. * bhikkhuna is. 

Jhalato'ti kimattharh? 

What is the word “jhalato” for? To show that in the 

example below, the function of Sutta is inapplicable as it is 

not jha, la-termed noun. (It is only an ordinary a-ending noun in 

“sa” vibhatti.) 

* purisassa ds, gs. 


११८, १४६. घपतो च योनं लोपो 
118, 146. Gha,pa,to ca yonam lopo. 
[Gha, pa, totcat+yonam-+lopo. 4 words] 
[V] Tehi gha,pa,jha,la,icce’tehi yonam lopo hoti va. 
All pathama, alapana and dutiya plural “yo vibhattis" being 


applied after nouns ending in “4, i, 1, u, पं”, are sometimes 
elided. 


248 


Nàma Kappa 


[This Sutta deletes all nominative, vocative and accusative 
plural “yo vibhattis" applied after gha, pa, jha, la-termed 
“a, i, 1, u, ü-ending" nouns. | 

See the examples below where “yo” is elided in the first examples. 
The second one is inapplicable. That is why there is still a “yo” visible 
in it. 

Examples of Feminine gender: 

[à, gha-termed] ® kafina. * kafihayo. 

[i, pa-termed] ® ratti. * rattiyo. 

[1, pa-termed] ® itthi. * itthiyo. 

[u, pa-termed] * yagü. * yaguyo. 

[ü, pa-termed] ® vadhü. * vadhuyo. 

Examples of Masculine gender: 

[i, jha-termed] * aggl. * aggayo. 

[u, la-termed] * bhikkhü. * bhikkhavo. 

[ü, la-termed] ® sayambhü. * sayambhuvo. 

Examples of Neuter gender: 

[i, jha-termed] ° atthi. * atthrni. 

[u, la-termed] * ayü. * ayüni-life or ages. (The meanings are shown 
before. All examples are np, vp, ap) 
Caggahana’manukaddhana’ttham. 

The word “ca” in Sutta has a purpose of pulling (taking in) 
the word “jhalato” from previous Sutta No.117 to this Sutta. 
(That is why jha, la-termed nouns are additionally included 
for the application of the function as prescribed in this Sut- 
ta). 


249 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


११९, १५५. छतो वोकारो च 
119, 155. Lato vokaro ca. [Lato+vokarotca. 3 words] 
[V] Tasma lato yonam vokaro hoti va. 


The pathama and dutiya plural “yo vibhattis" applied after 
“u, ü-ending nouns" sometimes change into “vo”. 

[This Sutta changes nominative and accusative plural “yo” applied after 
प, ü-ending nouns into “vo”. See the examples. The applied “vo” is 
shown underlined. The second is inapplicable one.] 


[u, la-termed] ° bhikkhavo. * bhikkhi, np, ap. 

[ü, la-termed] ® sayambhuvo. * sayambhi, np, ap. 
Karaggahanam kimattham? 

What benefit is there by the word “kāra”? (Refer to the word 
*vokaro" included in Sutta) 

Yonar no ca hoti. 

By means of it, the vibhatti “yo” becomes “no” in some 
words. (See “no” shown in bold) 


* jantuno-creatures, np, ap. 


Caggahana’ mavadharana ’ttharh. 

The word “ca” in the Sutta has a purpose of restricting the 
function of Sutta in the examples shown below. 

What does it mean? It means that there can be no such words like 


*Amuvo'" in the canonical texts as such nouns are excluded from the 
function of Sutta. 


* amü-so and so np, adj. purisa-men np. titthanti-stand av. 
i.e. So and so men stand. 

* amü ap, adj purise-so and so men ap. passatha-(you) see av. 
i.e. See so and so men! 


Iti namakappe pathamo kando. 
The first Section of Noun ends. 


250 


Nama Kappa 


Dutiya Kanda 


The Second Section 


१२०, २४३. अम्हस्स ममं सविभत्तिस्स से 
120, 243. Amhassa mamam savibhattissa se. 
[Amhassa+mamamtsavibhattissatse. 4 words] 
[V] Sabbasse’va amhasaddassa savibhattissa mamarh-adeso 
hoti se vibhattimhi. 


The whole of *amha-(1)" together with the applied vibhatti 
“sa” changes into “mamarh” when a catutthi, chatthi singu- 
lar “sa” vibhatti is applied after it. [amhatsa>mamarh] 
This function is quite simple and easy to understand. 
* mamarh-my (for me). ds. diyate-given, av. purisena-by man, is. 
i.e. 1 am given (something) by man. (Passive voice sentence) 
e mamam-my. gs. pariggaho-possession, nv. i.e. my possession. 


१२१, २३३. मयं योम्हि पठमे 
121, 233. Mayam yomhi pathame. 
[Mayarh+yomhi+pathame. 3 words] 
[V] Sabbasse’va amhasaddassa savibhattissa mayam-adeso 
hoti yomhi pathame. 


The whole of “amha” together with vibhatti “yo” changes 
into *mayam" when a pathama plural “yo” follows after it. 


e mayam-we. np. gacchama-go. av. i.e. We go. 

e mayam-we. np. dema-give. äv. i.e. We give. 

Amhasse'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “amhassa” for? To show that in example 
below, the function of Sutta is inapplicable as it is not the 
word *amha". 

* purisa-men. np. titthanti-stand. av. i.e. Men stand. 


Yomhr'ti kimattham? 
What is the word “yomhi” for? 
To show that in example below, the function of Sutta is in- 


251 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


applicable as it is not of “yo” vibhatti. 
* aham-I. ns. gacchami-go. av. i.e. I go. 


Pathame'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “pathame” for? To show that in example 
below, the function of Sutta is inapplicable as it is not of a 
“pathama yo" vibhatti. (It is of dutiya “yo”, accusative plu- 
ral. Hence, inapplicable). 

* amhakarh-us. ap. passasi-see. av. tvam-you. ns. i.e. You see us. 


$33, ९९. न्तुस्स न्तो 

122, 99. Ntussa nto. [Ntussatnto. 2 words] 

[V] Sabbasse'va ntupaccayassa savibhattissa nto-adeso hoti 
yomhi pathame. 


When a pathama plural “yo” vibhatti is applied after the 
“ntu-suffixed nouns", the entire “ntu” together with 
vibhatti “yo”, changes into “nto”. (See the example word clearly. 
nto is shown in bold, underlined). 


* gunavanto-those who have virtue. np. titthanti-stand, av. 

i.e. The virtuous stand. 
Ntusse’ ti kimattharh? 
What is the word “ntussa” for? To show that in the exam- 
ples below, the function of Sutta is inapplicable as they are 
not ntu-affixed nouns. 
* sabbe-all. np. satta-creatures. np. gacchanti-go. av. 
i.e. All creatures go. 
Pathame'ti kimattham? 
What is the word *pathame" for? To show that in the ex- 
ample below, the function of Sutta is inapplicable as it is 
not of “pathama yo" vibhatti. (It is of dutiya yo, accusative 
plural). 
* gunavante-the virtuous or those having dignity. ap. passanti-see. 
av. jana-people. np. i.e. People see virtuous ones or people are im- 
pressed with those having worldly dignity. 


252 


Nama Kappa 


१२३, १०३. न्तस्स से वा 

123, 103. Ntassa se và. [Ntassatse+va. 3 words] 

[V] Sabbasse’va ntupaccayassa savibhattissa ntassa'deso hoti 
và se vibhattimhi. 


When a catutthi, chatthi singular “sa” vibhatti is applied 
after a *ntu-suffixed noun", the whole of “ntu” together 
with vibhatti “sa” sometimes changes into *ntassa". 

(See the example below. Function is shown in bold, underlined) 

e silavantassa-the one having “sila-morality”. ds (adj). jhayino- 
who used to have jhanas. ds. i.e. Of the one having morality and jhanas. 
* silavato jhayino va. (This example is inapplicable, of the same 
meaning) 

Se'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “se” for? To show that in example below, 
the function of Sutta is inapplicable as it is not of “sa” 
vibhatti. (It is of “si”, a nominative singular. See next Sutta for mor- 
phological function of this example). 


* silavàa-the one who has “sila”. ns. titthati-stands. av. 
i.e. The one who has Sila (moral virtue) stands. 


१२४, ९८. आ सिम्हि 

124, 98. A simhi. [A+simhi. 2 words] 

[V] Sabbasse'va ntupaccayassa savibhattissa a-adeso hoti simhi 
vibhattimhi. 


When a pathama singular “si” vibhatti is applied after ntu- 
affixed nouns, the whole of “ntu” together with vibhatti 


“si” changes into an “a”. (See “a” shown underlined in bold. The 
“y” in front is that “v” of “vantu”. Please refer to Sutta 368. The “m” 
in front is that “m” of affix “mantu”. Please refer to Sutta 369) 


e gunava-the one who has “guna-virtue or dignity", the virtuous. 
e pafifiava-the one who has "paíifia-wisdom", the wise. 

e stlava-the one who has "sila-moral virtue". 

e balava-the one who has “bala-energy”, the strong. 


* dhanava-the one who has dhana-wealth, the wealthy. 


253 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


e matimà-the one who has mati-intellect, the intelligent. 
° satima-the one who has ‘“‘sati-attention, alertness,", alert. 
e dhitima-the one who has “dhiti-knowledge”, the wise.(all ns.) 


Ntusse'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “ntussa” for? To show that in the example 
below, the function of Sutta is inapplicable as it is not a ntu- 
affixed word, but an ordinary word. 

* puriso-man. ns. titthati-stands. av. 

Simhr’ti kimattharh? 

What is the word “simhi” for? To show that in the example 
below, the function of Sutta is inapplicable as it is not of 
“si” vibhatti. (It is of “yo” vibhatti.) 

* silavanto-those who have “sila-morality”. np. titthanti-stand. av. 
i.e. Those having moral virtue stand. 


१२५, १९८. अं नपुंसके 

125, 198. Am napurm sake. [Arh+napumsake. 2 words] 

[V] Sabbasse'va ntupaccayassa savibhattissa am-adeso hoti 
simhi vibhattimhi napumsake vattamanassa. 


When a pathama singular “si” vibhatti is applied after a 
ntu-affixed neuter gender noun, the entire “ntu” together 
with “si” changes into “arh”. (See the function shown underlined) 


(1) * gunavarh-the virtuous. ns (adj). cittam-mind. ns. titthati- 
exists. av. i.e. The virtuous mind exists. 

(2) ° rucimarh-the bright. ns (adj). puppharh-flower. ns. virocati- 
looks beautiful. av. i.e. The bright flower looks beautiful. 

Simhr ti kimattham? 

What is the word “simhi” for? To show that in the example 

below, the function of Sutta is inapplicable as it is not of 

“si” vibhatti. (It is of dutiya “am” vibhatti.) 

* vannavantarh-that which has beauty. as (adj). agandhakam-that 

which does not have fragrance. as (adj). virülhapuppham-fully 

blooming flower. as. passasi-see. äv. tvarh-you. ns. 


254 


Nàma Kappa 


i.e. You see fully blooming, beautiful flower without any fragrant 
smell. 


१२६, १०१. अवण्णा च गे 

126, 101. Avanna ca ge. [Avannatcatge. 3 words] 

[V] Sabbasse'va ntupaccayassa savibhattissa am, avanna ca 
honti ge pare. 


When an alapana (vocative) singular “si” vibhatti is applied 
after "ntu" suffixed noun, the entire “ntu” together with 


vibhatti “si” changes into “ar, a, a". [All three functions are 
shown underlined] 


bho * gunavam. bho * gunava. 

bho * gunava-Oh virtuous one! (All the same meaning, vs) 
Caggahana' manukaddhanattharn. 

The word “ca” has a purpose of pulling in the word “arh” 
from preceding Sutta (to this Sutta). 


What does it mean? It means that the function of changing into am is 
also included here in addition to a, a functions. 


१२७, १०२. तोतिता सस्िंनासु 
127, 102. To,ti,ta sa,smim,na,su. 
[To, ti, 189, smith, na, su. 2 words] 
[V] Sabbasse'va ntupaccayassa savibhattissa to,ti,ta, adesa 
honti và sa,smim,na-icce'tesu yathasankhyam. 


When singular “sa, smir, na” vibhattis are applied after 
ntu-affixed nouns, the entire “ntu” together with vibhattis 
“sa, smim, na” sometimes changes into “to, ti, ta” respec- 
tively. [ntu+sa>to, ntu+smim>ti, ntu+na>ta] 

See all examples of three functions shown in pairs. The second one in 
each set is inapplicable example. The applied functions are shown un- 
derlined. 


[sa] * gunavato. * gunavantassa. ds, gs. 
[smirh] ° gunavati. * gunavantasmim. ls, 
[na] * gunavata. * gunavantena. is, 


255 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


[sa] * satimato. * satimantassa. ds, gs 

[smirh] * satimati. * satimantasmim. Ls 

[na] * satimata. * satimantena. is 

Etesvr'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “etesu” for? To show that in the examples 
below, the function of Sutta is inapplicable as they are not 
of “sa, smirh, na” vibhatti. (They are of “si” vibhatti.) 

* gunava. * satima. ns. 


१२८, १०४. नंम्हि d वा 

128, 104. Nammhi tam va. [Narnmhi+tarn+va. 3 words] 

[V] Sabbasse'va ntupaccayassa savibhattissa tarh-adeso hoti va 
nammhi vibhattimhi. 


When a catutthi, or chatthi plural “nam” vibhatti is applied 
after ntu-suffixed nouns, the entire “ntu” together with 
vibhatti “nar” sometimes changes into “tamh”. 

(The function is shown underlined. The second is inapplicable example) 


* gunavatam. * gunavantanam. 
* satimatam. * satimantanam. (all are dp, gp). 





Nammhr ti kimattharh? 

What is the word “narnmhi” for? To show that in examples 
below, the function of Sutta is inapplicable as they are not 
of “narh” vibhatti. (They are of “yo” vibhatti) 

* gunavanto, np. titthanti. av. 

* satimanto-those who have “sati”. np. titthanti-stand. av. 


256 


Nama Kappa 


१२९, २२२. इमस्सिदमंसिसु नपुंसके 
129, 222. Imassi’da’mamsisu napumsake. 
[Imassa-*idam-am, si, su+napumsake. 4 words] 
[V] Sabbasse'va imasaddassa savibhattissa idam-adeso hoti va 
am,si,su napumsake vattamanassa. 


When singular “am, si,” vibhattis are applied after ima (this) 
in neuter gender, the whole “ima” together with “am, si 
vibhattis" optionally changes into “idam”. 


[am] ° idarh cittarh-this mind. as. passasi-(you) see. av. 
i.e. You see this mind. 
[si] * idarh cittam-this mind. ns. titthati-exists. av. 
i.e. This mind exists. 
Inapplicable examples: 
[am] * imam cittam passasi. 
[si] * imarh cittam titthati. (The same meaning) 
Napumsake’ti kimattham? 
What is the word *napumsake" for? 
To show that in examples below, the function of Sutta is 
inapplicable as they are of masculine gender. 
* imam purisarh-this man. as. passasi-(you) see. äv. 
i.e. You see this man. 
* ayam puriso-this man. ns. titthati-stands. av. 
i.e. This man stands. 


१३०, २२५. अमुस्सादुं 

130, 225. Amussa’dum. [Amussa-adum. 2 words] 

[V] Sabbasse'va amusaddassa savibhattissa adum-adeso hoti 
am,si,su napumsake vattamanassa. 


When singular *am, si," vibhattis are applied after neuter 
gender noun word “amu-so and so", the whole of “amu” 
along with “am, si” changes into “adum”. 


e adum puppharh-so and so flower. as. passasi-(you) see. àv. 
i.e. You see so and so flower. 


257 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


e adum puppharh-so and so flower. ns. virocati-looks beautiful. 
i.e. Such and such a flower looks beautiful. 

Napumsake’ti kimattham? 

What is the word *napumsake" for? 

To show that in examples below, the function of Sutta 1s in- 

applicable as they are of masculine gender. 

* amur rajanarh-so and so king. as. passasi-(you) see. ay. 
i.e. You see so and so a king. 

* asu raja-so and so king. ns. titthati-stands. av. 


१३१, ०. इत्थिपुमनपुंसकसङ्क्यं 
131,...Itthi,puma,napumsaka,sankhyar. 
[Itthi, puma, napumsaka, sankhyam. 1 word] 
[V] "Itthipumanapumsakasankhyam" icce'tam adhikara'ttham 
veditabbam. 


This Sutta is to be regarded as an “adhikara” Sutta effecting 
succeeding three Suttas (with regard to numerical nouns by imply- 
ing that all numerical nouns are related to three genders). 


Note: The Sutta itself means that “numerical nouns of feminine, mascu- 
line and neuter gender". So, it influences next three Suttas 132, 133 and 
134 by highlighting the relationship of numerical nouns with all gen- 
ders. 


१३२, २२८. योसु दिन्नं द्वे च 
132, 228. Yosu dvinnam dve ca. 
[Yosu*dvinnam-*dve-ca. 4 words] 
[V] Dvinnam saükhyanam itthipumanapumsake vattamananam 
savibhattinam dve hoti yo-icce’tesu. 


The numerical word *dvi (two)" which belongs to all three 
genders, changes into “dve” along with vibhatti “yo” ap- 


plied after it. (See the examples carefully with its corresponding 
words in different genders) 


258 


Nama Kappa 


* dve itthiyo-two women (Feminine). 

० dve dhamma-two Dhammas (Masculine). 

e dyve rüpani-two forms (Neuter). (all np, ap.) 

Yosvr'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “yosu” for? 

To show that in the example below, the function of Sutta is 
inapplicable as it is not of “yo”, but of “su”. 

* dvisu-at two. 


Caggahanena duve,dvaya,ubha,ubhaya,duvi ca honti yo, 
nà,nam icce’tesu. 


By means of “ca” in Sutta, “yo, na, nam" vibhattis applied 
after “dvi” change into “duve, dvaya, ubha, ubhaya, 
duvi”. 
० duve samana-two monks. ° duve brahmana-two Brahmins. 
e duve jana-two persons. np. ap. 
* dvayena-with two. is. * dvayarh-to two, i.e. two by two, mutually. 
as. 
e ubhinnam. * ubhayesam. * duvinnath-of two (All three are 

of the same meaning). dp, gp. 


१३३, २३०. तिचतुन्नं तिस्सो चतस्सो, तयो चत्तारो, तीणि चत्तारि 

133, 230. Ti catunnam tisso,catasso, tayo,cattaro, 
tini,cattari. [Ti, catunnam-tisso, catasso, tayo, cattaro, 
tini, cattari. 2 words] 

[V] Ti, catunnam sankhyanam itthipumanapumsake vat- 
tamananam savibhattinam tisso,catasso, tayo,cattaro, 
tini,cattari icce'te adesa honti yathasankhyam 
yo-icce'tesu. 


The numerical words *'ti (three), catu (four) " which belongs 
to all three genders, changes into “tisso, catasso, tayo, 
cattaro, tini, cattari," respectively along with vibhatti “yo’ 
applied after them. 

tisso (three), catasso (four) = [To be used with corresponding femi- 
nine gender words only] 


* 


259 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


tayo, cattaro= [Masculine] 

tini, cattari= [Neuter] 

See the examples shown below with words of corresponding gender. 
The numerical nouns serve as adjective words. 


[Feminine] * tisso vedana-three feelings. 
* catasso disa-four directions. 
[Masculine] * tayo jana, jane-three persons. 
* cattaro purisa, purise-four men. 
[Neuter] * tini ayatanani-three bases. 
e cattari ariyasaccani-four noble truths. All np. ap. 


Yosvr'ti kimattham? What is the word “‘yosu” for? To show 
that in the examples below, the function of Sutta is inappli- 
cable as they are not of “yo”, but of “su” vibhatti. 

* fIsu-at threes. * catüsu-at fours. lp. 


१३४, २५१. पञ्चादीनमकारो 

134, 251. Panca’dina’makaro. [Paiica-adinarh+akaro.2 words] 

[V] Pafica'dinam sankhyanarh itthipumanapurhsake 
vattamananam savibhattissa antassa sarassa akaro hoti 
yo-icce'tesu. 


In numerical noun words such as “pañca (five) etc.," which 
belongs to all three genders, the last component vowel 
thereof changes into an “a” along with vibhatti “yo” applied 
after them. 

Note: Only the last vowel changes into “a”. Changing “a” back to “a” 
is a redundant function, which is stipulated so as to prevent any further 


morphological modification. Compare with the function of Sutta num- 
ber 90. 


* pafica-five, * pafica-five. 
० cha, * cha-six. 

* satta, * satta-seven. 

* attha, * attha-eight. 

* Nava, * nava-nine. 

* dasa, * dasa-ten. np, ap. 


260 


Nàma Kappa 


Note: The same word shown two times, the first being nominative 
plural and the second accusative plural. 

Paficadina' miti kimattham? 

What is the word “Paficadinath” for? 

To show that in the examples below, the function of Sutta is 
inapplicable as they are not pafica etc. (They are dvi and ti. 
Hence, unlike Pafica etc., they undergo different morphological chang- 
es). 

* dve-two. * tayo-three. np. ap. 


१३५, ११८. राजस्स रञ्जो राजिनो से 
135, 118. Rajassa rafifio,rajino se. 
[Rajassa+rafiio, rajinotse. 3 words] 
[V] Sabbasse'va rajasaddassa savibhattissa 
rafifio,rajino-icce’te adesa honti se vibhattimhi. 


The whole word “raja (king)" changes into “rañño, rajino" 
along with vibhatti “sa” applied after it. 
e rañño. ° rajino-of the king. ds, gs. 


Se’ti kimattharh? What is the word “se” for? 

To show that in the example below, the function of Sutta is 
inapplicable as it is not of “sa”, but of “na”. 

* rafifia-by the king. is. 


१३६, ११९. Wa नंम्हि वा 
136, 119. Ranifiarh nammhi va. 
[Rafifarh+nammhitva. 3 words] 
[V] Sabbasse'va rajasaddassa savibhattissa rafifiam-adeso hoti 
và nammhi vibhattimhi. 


The entire word “raja (king)" sometimes changes into 


"rafifiam" along with vibhatti *nam" applied after it. 
[The second is inapplicable example] 


e rafiflarh, * rajtinarh-kings’, gp. idarh rattham-this country (is) 
ns.. i.e. This country is of the kings. 


261 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


१३७, ११६. नाम्हि रञ्ञा वा 

137, 116. Namhi ranna va. [Nāmhi+raňňā+vā. 3 words] 

[V] Sabbasse'va rajasaddassa savibhattissa rafifia-adeso hoti 
và namhi vibhattimhi. 
The entire word “raja (king)" sometimes changes into 
"rafifia" along with the vibhatti “na” applied after it. 
tena * rafifia-by that king. is. katam-done. kv. 
i.e. done by that king. 
* rajena-by king. và-in other way of usage of the same word. 
katarh-done. (This is inapplicable example, of the same meaning) 
Namhr'ti kimattham? 
What is the word *namhi" for? 
To show that in the example below, the function of Sutta is 
inapplicable as it is not of “na”, but of “sa”. 
* rafifio-king's. gs. santakam-belonging. nv-ns. 


१३८, १२१. स्मिम्हि voor राजिनि 
138, 121. Smimmhi raññe,rājini. 
[Smirmhi-rafitie, rajini. 2 words] 
[V] Sabbasse'va rajasaddassa savibhattissa 
rafifie,rajini-icce'te adesa honti smimmhi vibhattimhi. 





The whole word “raja (king)" sometimes changes into 
“rane, rajini" along with vibhatti "smim" applied after it. 


e rafifie, * rajini-in king. Is. silam-morality. ns. titthati-exists. av. 


262 


Nama Kappa 


१३९, २४५. तुम्हम्हाकं तयि मयि 
139, 245. Tumha’mhakam tayi,mayi. 
[Tumha, amhakam+tayi, mayi. 2 words] 
[V] Sabbesam tumha,amha-saddanam savibhattinam 
tayi,mayi, icce’te adesa honti yathasankhyam smimmhi 
vibhattimhi. 


The entire word *tumha (you), amha (1)” changes into “ta- 
yi, mayi” respectively along with vibhatti *smim" applied 
after them. (tumha+smirh>tayi. amha+smirh>mayi) 

e tayi-in you. ° mayi-in me. ls. 

Smimmhr'ti kimattham? 

What is the word *smimmhi" for? 

To show that in the examples below, the function of Sutta is 
inapplicable as they are not of *smim", but of "si". 

* tvam-you. ns. bhavasi-are. dv. i.e. You are. 

* aham-I. ns. bhavami-am. av. i.e. I am. 


१४०, २३२. त्वमहं सिम्हि च 
140, 232. Tva’maham simhi ca. 
[Tvarh, aharntsimhi+ca. 3 words] 
[V] Sabbesam tumha,amhasaddanam savibhattinam 
tvam,aham, icce'te adesa honti yathasankhyam simhi 
vibhattimhi. 


The whole words “tumha and amha” changes into “tvar, 
ahar” respectively along with vibhatti “si” applied after 
them. [tumha+si>tvarh, amha-si»aham] 


e tvarh-you. ® aham-I. ns. 

Simhr ti kimattham? 

What is the word *simhi" for? 

To show that in the examples below, the function of Sutta is 
inapplicable as they are not of “si”, but of *smim". 

* tayi. * mayi. (Refer to Sutta 139) 


263 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


Caggahanena tuvam ca hoti. 

By means of “ca” in the Sutta, *tumha" also changes into 
"tuvam" (together with vibhatti) when “si” is applied after 
it. 

* tuvam-you. ns. sattha-(are) teacher. nv. i.e. You are teacher. 


१४१, २४१. तवमम से 

141, 241. Tava,mama se. [Tava, mama+se. 2 words] 

[V] Sabbesam tumha,amhasaddanam savibhattinam 
tava,mama-icce'te adesa honti yathasankhyam se 
vibhattimhi. 


The entire “tumha, and amha” changes into “tava, ma- 
ma" respectively along with vibhatti “sa” applied after 
them. [tumha+sa>tava, amha+sa>mama] 


* tava-yours. * mama-my. 


Se'ti kimattham? 

What is the word "se" for? 

To show that in the examples below, the function of Sutta is 
inapplicable as they are not of “sa”, but of *smim". 

* tayi. * mayi. (Refer to Sutta 139) 


१४२, २४२. तुय्हं मय्हञ्च 
142, 242. Tuyham,mayhan’ca. 
[Tuyharh, mayharh+ca. 2 words] 
[V] Sabbesarh tumha,amhasaddanam savibhattinam 
tuyham,mayhamhicce’ te adesa honti yathasankhyam 
se vibhattimhi. 


The whole “tumha and amha” changes into “tuyham, 
mayham” respectively along with vibhatti “sa”. 
[tumha+sa>tuyham, amhat+sa>mayham] 


e tuyharh-your. ° mayham-my. ds. dhanarh-wealth. as. dtyate- 
(is) given (by someone) av. 


264 


Nama Kappa 


Se'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “se” for? 

To show that in the examples below, the function of Sutta is 
inapplicable as they are not of “sa”, but of “na”. 

* taya-with/ by you. * maya-with/ by me. is. 


१४३, २३५. तंममंम्हि 

143, 235. Tam,mamam' mhi. [Tarh, marh+amhi. 2 words] 

[V] Sabbesam tumha,amhasaddanam savibhattinam 
tarh,mam icce'te adesa honti yathasankhyam ammhi 
vibhattimhi. 


The whole words “tumha, and amha" changes into “tarh, 
mam,” respectively along with vibhatti “am,” applied after 
them. [tumha+arh>tarh, amhatarn>marh] 


e tarn-to you. * Marh-to me. as. 

Ammhr'ti kimattham? 

What is the word *ammhi" for? 

To show that in the examples below, the function of Sutta is 
inapplicable as they are not of “am”, but of “na”. 

* taya. * maya. (Refer to Sutta 145) 


१४४, २३४. तवंममञ्च नवा 
144, 234. Tavarn mamaíi'ca nava. 
[Tavarh, mamarh+catnava. 3 words] 
[V] Sabbesam tumha,amhasaddanam savibhattinam 
tavam,mamarh-icce’te adesa honti nava yathasankhyam 
ammhi vibhattimhi. 


The entire “tumha and amha” sometimes changes into 
“tavam, mamar,” respectively along with vibhatti “ar,” 
applied after them. [tumha*am»tavam, amha+arh>mamarh] 


e tavam-to you, ° mamath-to me. as. passati-(he) sees. ay. 
i.e. (he) sees you and me. 


265 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


Nava’ ti kimattham? 

What is the word “nava” for? 

To show that in the examples below, despite being in “am” 
vibhatti, the function of Sutta is inapplicable as implied by 
the word “nava”. 

* tam-to you. * marh-me. passati-(he) sees (The same meaning like 
preceding ones, but different word forms). 
Caggahana’manukaddhana’ttham. 

The word “ca” in Sutta has a purpose of pulling in the word 
"*ammhi" from previous Sutta to this Sutta. 


१४५, २३८. नाम्हि तयामया 

145, 238. Namhi taya,maya. [Namhr+taya, maya. 2 words] 

[V] Sabbesam tumha,amhasaddanam savibhattinam 
taya,maya-icce'te adesa honti yathasankhyam namhi 
vibhattimhi. 
The whole words “tumha and amha” changes into “taya, 


maya” respectively along with vibhatti “na” applied after 
them. [tumha+na>taya, amha*na»maya] 


e taya-by you, ° maya-by me. is. katam-done. kv. 
Namhi'ti kimattharh? What is the word *namhi" for? 
To show that in the examples below, the function of Sutta is 


inapplicable as they are not of “na”, but of “hi”. 
* tumhehi-by/from you, * amhehi-by/from us. ip, abp. 


१४६, २३६. तुम्हस्स तुवंत्वमम्हि 
146, 236. Tumhassa tuvam,tva’mam/’mhi. 
[Tumhassa+tuvarh, tvam--ammhi. 3 words] 
[V] Sabbassa tumhasaddassa savibhattissa tuvam,tvarh, icce’te 
adesa honti amimhi vibhattimhi. 


The whole word “tumha (you)" changes into *tuvam, 
tvam" along with vibhatti *am" applied after them. 
[tumha+arm>tuvam, tvar] 


266 


Nàma Kappa 


(1) kalingarassa-(as if it were) worthless chaff . ds. * tuvam-to you. 
as. mafifie-(T) think. av. i.e. I think you as if worthless chaff. 

(2) katthassa-(as if it were a) piece of wood. ds. * tvam-to you. as. 
mafifie-(I) assume. àv. i.e. I regard you as if a piece of wood. 


१४७, २४६. पदतो दुतियाचतुत्थीछट्टीसु वोनो 
147, 246. Padato dutiya,catutthi,chatthisu vo,no. 
[Padato--dutiya, catutthi, chatthisu+vo, no. 3 words] 
[V] Sabbesam tumha-amhasaddanam savibhattinarh yada 
padasma paresam vo,no-adesa honti nava yathasankhyam 
dutiya,catutthr,chatth, iccetesu bahuvacanesu. 


The whole words “tumha and amha”, when used after a 
contextual word in a sentence, sometimes changes into “vo, 
no" respectively along with dutiya plural “yo”, catutthi, 


chatthi plural *nam" vibhattis applied after them. 
[tumha+yo & narh>vo, amhatyo & nam?no] 


(1) pahaya-leaving. kv. * VO-you. ap. bhikkhave-Oh monks! vp. 
gamissami-(I) will go. av. i.e. I will go leaving you. 

(2) mà-do not. nip. ° no-us. ap. ajja-today. ind. vikantimsu-cut in- 
to pieces. av. rafifio-king's, gs. suda-royal cook. ns. mahanase- 
at great kitchen. /s. i.e. Today, do not cut us into pieces by the royal 
cook in the great kitchen. 

evam dutiya'tthe. 

Thus, (these examples are) in the sense of accusative case. 


(1) dhammarh-Dhamma. as. ° V0-you. dp. bhikkhave-Oh monks! 
vp. desessami-(I) will teach. av. 
i.e. I will teach you Dhamma, Oh monks! 

(2) samvibhajetha-distribute formally well, av. ° no-us. dp. rajj- 
ena-with (matters of ruling authority over) kingdom. is. 
i.e. Assign (distribute power) us well with kingdom! 

evam catutthya'tthe. 

Thus, (these examples are) in the sense of dative case. 


(1) tuttho' smi [Tutthorasmi] * vo bhikkhave pakatiya. 
tuttho-pleased. kn. asmi-(I) am. dv. ° vO-you. gp. bhikkhave- 


267 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


Oh monks! pakatiya-by nature, naturally. is. 
i.e. I am naturally pleased with you, Oh monks! 
(2) sattha-teacher. ns. * no-our. gp. bhagava-great honorable. ns. 
anuppatto-has come, arrived. kv. 
i.e. Our great honorable teacher has arrived. 
evam chatthya'tthe. 
Thus, (these examples are) in the sense of genitive case. 


Nava’ti kimattham"? 

What is the word “nava” for? 

To show that in the example below, despite being in “narh’ 
vibhatti, the function of Sutta is inapplicable as implied by 
the word “‘nava”’. [*nava" restricts the function] 

eso-this. ns. * amhakarh-our. gp. sattha-(is) teacher. nv in ns. 

i.e. This is our teacher. 


» 


Tumha’mhaka’miti kimattham? 
[tumha’mhakarh-tumha+amhakam] 

What is the word “tumhamhakath” for? 

To show that in the examples below, the function of Sutta is 
inapplicable as they are not “tumha, amha”. 

* ete-these. ap. * isayo-hermits. ap. passasi-(you) see. dv. 

i.e. You see these hermits. 

Padato'ti kimattham? 

What is the word *padato" for? 

To show that in the example below, the function of Sutta is 
inapplicable as it is not behind a word in the context of a 
sentence. It is an independent word not contextually related 
to any word in front of it. So, it is inapplicable. 

* tumhakam-your. gp. satthà-teacher. nv in ns. 

Etesvr'ti kimattham? What is the word “etesu” for? 

To show that in the example below, the function of Sutta is 
inapplicable as it is of “pathama yo". 

gacchatha-go. av. * tumhe-you. np. i.e. You go! 


268 


Nama Kappa 


१४८, २४७. तेमेकवचनेसु च 
148, 247. Te, me’kavacanesu ca. 
[Te, met+ekavacanesu+ca. 3 words] 
[V] Sabbesam tumha,amha-saddanam savibhattinarh yada 
padasma paresam te,me-adesa honti yathasankhyam 
catutthi,chattht, icce’tesu ekavacanesu. 


The whole words “tumha and amha” positioned after a 
contextual word, changes into “te, me,” respectively along 
with catutth1, chatthr singular vibhatti “sa” applied after 
them. [tumha+sa>te, amha+sa>me] 


(1) dadami-(I) give. av. ° te-you. ds. gamavarani-reward villages. 
ap. pafica-five. ap (Numerical Adj). 
i.e. I give you five villages as a reward. 
(2) dadahi-give. av. ° me-me. ds. gamavaram-gift village 
(request). 
as. i.e. Give me village as a reward! (Said to kings in ancient times) 
(3) 1dam-this. ns. * te-your. gs. rattham-(is) country. nv. 
i.e. This (is) your country. 
(4) ayam-this. ns. * me-my. gs. putto-(is) son. nv. 
i.e. This (is) my son. 
Padato'ti kimattham? 
What is the word “padato” for? 
To show that in the examples below, the function of Sutta 
is inapplicable as it is not after another word in the con- 
text of a sentence. (There is not a context-word before it) 
* tava-your. gs. fiati-relative. nv. 
* mama-my. gs. fiati-relative. nv. 


269 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


१४९, २४८. न अंम्हि 

149, 248. Na ammhi. [Na+arimhi. 2 words] 

[V] Sabbesam tumha,amhasaddanam savibhattinarh yada 
padasma paresarh te,me-adesa na honti ammhi 
vibhattimhi. 


The whole words “tumha, and amha” are not to be 
changed into “te, me,” when followed by dutiya singular 
vibhatti “arn”. (There is no “te, me” function in accusative singular 


case. Instead, only ordinary vibhatti “arn” applied after them. See the 
examples carefully). 


(1) passeyya-would like to see. av. ® tar-you. as. vassasatam-till 
hundred years. as (adv). arogam-being healthy. cn in as (also adv). 
(2) SO-that person. ns. ° mam-to me. as. braviti-says. av. 


i.e. He says to me (that he) would like to see you being healthy for a 
hundred years. 


१५०, २४९. वा ततिये च 

150, 249. Va tatiye ca. [Vattatiyetca. 3 words] 

[V] Sabbesam tumha-amhasaddanam savibhattinarh yada 
padasma paresam te,me-adesa honti va yathasankhyam ta- 
tiye'kavacane pare. 


The entire “tumha, and amha" which are after a contextual 
word, sometimes change into “te, me," respectively along 
८८. eed 


with tatiya singular vibhatti “na” applied after them. 
[tumha+na>te, amha+na>me | 


(1) katam-done. kv. * te-by you. is. paparh-unwholesome deed, 
evil, sin. as. i.e. unwholesome deed was done by you. 

(2) katarh, kv. * me-by me. is. paparh. as. 
i.e. unwholesome deed was done by me. 
The following examples are inapplicable ones as restricted by “Va”. 
The meaning is very much the same though. 

(1) katam * taya-by you. is. papam. 

(2) kata * maya-by me. is. papam. 


Padato'ti kimattham? What is the word “padato” for? 


270 


Nàma Kappa 


To show that in the example below, the function of Sutta is 
inapplicable as it is not after a contextual word. 
* taya-by you. is. katarh-done. * maya-by me. is. katam-done. 


१५१, २५०. बहुवचनेसु वोनो 
151, 250. Bahuvacanesu vo,no. 
[Bahuvacanesu+vo, no. 2 words] 
[V] Sabbesam tumha-amhasaddanam savibhattinarh yada 
padasma paresam vo,no-adesa honti yathasankhyam 
tatiya-bahuvacanesu paresu. 


The whole words “tumha and amha", when used after the 
contextual words, sometimes changes into “vo and no” re- 
spectively along with tatiya plural “hi” vibhatti applied af- 
ter them. 


(1) katam-done. ® vo-by you. ip. kammath-deed, action. as. 
i.e. The deed was done by you. 
(2) katarh ® no-by us. ip. kammarh. as. 
i.e. The deed was done by us. 
Padato'ti kimattham? 
What is the word *padato" for? 
To show that in the examples below, the function of Sutta is 
inapplicable as they are not after a word in the context of a 
sentence. 
* tumhehi-by you. ip. katar. i.e. done by you. 
* amhehi-by us. ip. katar. i.e. done by us. 


Bahuvacanaggahanena yomhi pathame vo,no-adesa 
honti. 


By use of Bahuvacana (Refer to the word “Bahuvacanesu”) in 

the Sutta, “tumha, and amha" of pathama “yo-nominative plu- 

ral" can also be changed into “vo and no” along with the 

vibhatti *yo". 

(1) gamath-to the village. as. * V0-you. np. gaccheyyatha-should 
go. ay. i.e. You should go to village. 


271 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


(2) gamath, as. * 10-06. np. gaccheyyama-should go. av. 
i.e. We should go to the village. 


१५२, १३६. पुमन्तस्सा सिम्हि 
152, 236. Puma’ntassa’ simhi. 
[Puma-antassat+a+simhi. 3 words] 
[V] Puma-icce'va' mantassa savibhattissa a-adeso hoti simhi 
vibhattimhi. 


The last component vowel of the word “puma (man)", 
changes into “a” along with pathma singular “si” vibhatti 
applied after it. (See example. The function is shown underlined) 


e puma-man. ns. titthati-stands. av. i.e. The man stands. 

Simhr ti kimattham? 

What is the word *simhi" for? 

To show that in the example below, the function of Sutta is 
inapplicable as it is not of “si”. It is of “yo” vibhatti. 

* pumano-men. np. titthanti-stand. av. i.e. The men stand. 


Antaggahanena maghava,yuva-icce’va’madina’mantassa 
savibhattissa 4-adeso hoti. 

By the word "anta", the last component vowel “a” of ma- 
ghava, yuva etc, can also be changed into “a” together with 
the applied vibhattis. 


e maghava-the king of heaven named Magha. ns. * yuva-young 
man. 775. 


272 


Nàma Kappa 


१५३, १३८. अमालपनेकवचने 
153, 138. A’malapane’kavacane. 
[Am-alapana-ekavacane. 2 words] 
[V] Puma-icce'va' mantassa savibhattissa am-adeso hoti 
alapane'kavacane pare. 


The last component vowel “a” of the word “puma (man)", 
changes into "am" along with an Alapana (vocative) singular 
“si” vibhatti applied behind it. (See function shown underlined) 


he ® pumath-Oh man! vs. [^he" is a vocative particle similar to “hey” 
in English. “he” is to be pronounced as in *Hay"] 

Alapane’ti kimattham? 

What is the word “alapane” for? 

To show that in the example below, the function of Sutta is 
not applied as it is not *alapana (vocative) si" as stipulated 

by Sutta. It is an ordinary nominative singular “51”. 

* pumà-man. ns. 


Ekavacane'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “ekavacane” for? 

To show that in the example below, the function of Sutta is 
not applied as it is not an ekavacana (vocative singular), but a 
plural “yo”. 

he * pumàno!-Oh men! vp. 


१५४, ०. समासे च विभासा 

154,. ..samase ca vibhasa. [Samāse+ca+vibhāsā. 3 words] 

[V] Puma-icce’va’mantassa samase ca arh-adeso hoti vibhasa 
samase kate. 


The last component vowel “a” of the word “puma”, when 
used in compound nouns, sometimes changes into “am” af- 
ter a Samasa (compound process) is complete. 

See the example where bold-faced, double nn is shown. The first n is a 


morpheme derived from am function applied as per this Sutta. The last 
component vowel “a” of puma changes into arh>pumam. That “rh” is 


273 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


further changed into “n” by means of Sutta No.31>puman. After this 
process, it thus becomes a complete word: 
“oJtthipumannapurhsakanani”. 

Note: This example is a Dvanda (copulative) compound noun. The 
words inside bracket are called ED (etymological definition) also called 
viggaha. There will be a lot of Viggaha (EDs) in Samasa, Taddhita, 
Kita and Unadi sections as the example words are explained 
through the use of EDs. 


[Itthi ca-feminine also. puma ca-masculine also. napumsako ca- 
neuter also] * Itthipumannapumsakanani-feminine, masculine and 
neuter natures. [Dvanda compound] 

[Itthipumanapumsakanam-of feminine, masculine and neuter gen- 
ders. samüho-group] * itthipumannapumsakasamüho-the group 
of feminine, masculine and neuter genders. 

[This is a chatthi-tappurisa, Determinative compound noun] 
Vibhasa'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “Vibhasa” for? 

To show that the function of Sutta is inapplicable in the ex- 
ample below. (See the word “puma” in bold-face. There is no func- 
tion of this Sutta applied) 

* Jtthipumanapurhsakani- feminine, masculine and neuter natures. 


Note: Vibhasa-means “sometimes” or “in some instances" 
which is similar to “vā, nava" etc. 


१५५, १३७. योस्वानो 

155, 137. Yosva’no. [Yosut+ano. 2 words] 

[V] Puma-icce'va' mantassa savibhattissa ano-adeso hoti yosu 
vibhattisu. 


The last component vowel “a” of word “puma”, changes 
into “āno” along with plural “yo” vibhatti applied after it. 
[See “ano” shown in bold, underlined] 

e pumano-men. np, ap. he ° pumano-Oh men! . vp. 

Yosvr'ti kimattharh? 

What is the word *yosu" for? To show that in the example 
below, the function of Sutta is inapplicable as it is not of 


274 


Nama Kappa 


“yo”, It is a singular “si” vibhatti. 
* puma-man. 


१५६, १४२. आने स्मिम्हि वा 

156, 142 Ane smimmhi va. [Ane*smimmhi-và. 3 words] 

[V] Puma-icce'va' mantassa savibhattissa ane-adeso hoti va 
smimmhi vibhattimhi. 


The last component vowel “a” of the word “puma”, some- 
times changes into “ane” along with sattami singular 


"smim" vibhatti applied after it. [See “ane” in the first example 
shown in bold, underlined. The second is inapplicable example]. 


e pumane-in man. * pume và-in man. Js. 


१५७, १४०. हिविभतिम्हि च 
157, 140. Hivibhattimhi ca. [Hivibhattimhi+ca. 2 words] 
[V] Puma-icce'va' mantassa hivibhattimhi ca aneadeso hoti. 


The last component vowel “a” of the word "puma", some- 
times changes into “ane” when tatiya, pañcamī plural “hi” 
vibhattis are applied after it. (See “ane” shown in bold, underlined 


below) 


* pumanehi. * pumanebhi-with/from men (Both are of ip, abp and 
of the same meaning). 

Puna vibhattiggahanam kimattham? 
Savibhattiggahananivattana'ttham. 


Why is there the word “vibhatti” included in Sutta again? 
(Please refer to Hivibhattimhi in Sutta) 

To prevent the word “Savibhatti” from being used in the 
Sutta and its function. (This means that the function of Sutta in the 
example below is carried out excluding “hi” vibhatti, without making 
any morphological change to it, leaving the vibhatti as it is. That is why 
there is “hi” still visible in the example). 

* pumanehi. 


275 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


Caggahanena maghava,yuva-icce’va’madina’ mantassa 
ana-adeso hoti si,yo,arh,yo, icce’tesu vibhattisu. 
Puma,kamma,thama’ntassa cu'karo hoti sa,sma,su 
vibhattisu. 


By means of the word “ca” in Sutta, the last component 
vowel “a” of maghava, yuva changes into “ana” when “si, 
yo, am, yo,” vibhattis are applied after them. Also, the last 
component vowel “a” of the words “puma, kamma, 
thama" changes into “u” when “sa, sma” vibhattis are ap- 
plied after them. [2 functions by “ca” 

See the ana-function underlined in the examples below carefully. 

e maghavano, ns. * maghavana. np. ° maghavanar, as. 

e maghavane. ap. a youth named “Magha”. 

* yuvano-young man. ns. * yuvana, np. * yuvanam, as. 

* yuvane. ap. (All ana-function examples) 

Below are u-function examples. “प” is shown in bold, underlined be- 
fore morpheme no and nà vibhattis. 


* pumuno-of man, ds, gs. * pumuna-from man. abs. 
e kammuno, ds, gs. ° kammuna-with/by Kamma, abs. 
e thamuno. ds, gs. ° thamuna-with/by capacity or strength. abs. 


१५१, १४३. सुस्मि मा वा 

158, 143. Susmi? mà va. [Susmim+a+va. 3 words] 

[V] Puma-icce’va’mantassa su-icce’tasmim vibhattimhi 
a-adeso hoti va. 


The last component vowel of the word “puma”, sometimes 
changes into “a” when sattami plural vibhatti “su” is ap- 
plied after it. (See “a” in front of “su” shown in bold, underlined. 
The second is inapplicable). 


* pumasu-in men. * pumesu va lp. (the same meaning) 


276 


Nama Kappa 


१५९, १३९. उ नाम्हिच 

159, 139. U namhi ca. [U+namhi-+ca. 3 words] 

[V] Puma-icce'va' mantassa a,u-adesa honti va namhi 
vibhattimhi. 


The last component vowel of the word “puma”, sometimes 
changes into “a & u" when a tatiya singular “na” vibhatti is 
applied after it. (See the first two examples carefully. Both à and u 
are shown in bold, underlined) 


° pumana, ° pumunda-with man, 
* pumena va (all is. this is inapplicable but of the same meaning) 


Caggahana’manukaddhana’ttham. 
The word “ca” in Sutta has a purpose of pulling in “a- 
function" from the preceding Sutta to this Sutta. 


१६०, १९७. अ कम्मन्तस्स च 
160, 197. A kamma'"ntassa ca. 
[A+kamma-antassatca. 3 words] 
[V] Kamma-icce’vamantassa ca u,a-adesa honti va namhi 
vibhattimhi. 


The last component vowel “a” of the word “kamma (action, 
volitional kammic energy)", sometimes changes into “0 & a” 


66a? 


when a tatiya singular “na” vibhatti is applied after it. 


Note: Although the word “a” only is included in Sutta, *u" from the 
preceding Sutta is carried over to this Sutta. Therefore “0” function is 


6699 


also enjoined in this Sutta in addition to “a” function. See u and a 
shown in bold, underlined in the examples. 


* kammuna. * kammana-with/by Kamma. 
* kammena và (All is, this is inapplicable example of the same 
meaning) 


Caggahanena maghava, yuva-icce' va mantassa a-adeso 
hoti kvaci na,su-icce’tesu vibhattisu. 


2T] 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


By means of the word “ca” in the Sutta, the last component 
vowel “a” of maghava, yuva, sometimes changes into “a” 
when “na, su" vibhattis are applied behind them. [See two 
pairs of examples in each group carefully. The “ 4” is shown in bold, 
underlined. The second pair is inapplicable one] 


(1) * maghavana. is. ° maghavasu-with/by king of heaven named 
Magha. lp. 
* maghavesu. Jp. * maghavena va. is. (Inapplicable words) 
(2) * yuvana-with/by youth. is. * yuvasu-in youths, ७. 
* yuvesu, lp. * yuvena và. is. (Inapplicable examples) 


Iti namakappe dutiyo kando. 
The Second Section of Noun ends. 


278 


Nama Kappa 


Tatiya Kanda 
The Third Section 


१६१, २४४. तुम्हम्हेहि नमाकं 
161, 244. Tumha' mhehi na’makam. 
[Tumha, amhehitnam+akarh. 3 words] 
[V] Tehi tumha,amhehi namvacanassa akarh hoti. 


The catutth1, chattht plural vibhatti “narn” which is applied 
after the words “tumha and amha” changes into “akam”. 
[See "*akam" shown in bold, underlined] 


e tumhakam-your. ° amhakarh-our. dp, gp. 

Na'miti kimattharh? 

What is the word “nam” for? To show that the examples be- 
low are inapplicable as they are not of “narh” vibhatti. 

(They are of “hi” vibhatti) 

* tumhehi. * amhehi. ip, 400. 


१६२, २३७. वा य्वप्पठमो 


162, 237. Va yva’ppathamo. [Vi+yo+a-pathamo. 3 words] 
[V] Tehi tumha,amhehi yo appathamo akam hoti va. 


The dutiya plural vibhatti “yo”, applied after “tumha, and 


amha” sometimes changes into *akam". 
Note: dutiya plural vibhatti “yo” is also called apathama (non-pathama) 
“yo”. The second examples are inapplicable. 


e tumhakarm-you. ap. passami-(I) see. àv. i.e. (I) see you. 

* tumhe, ap. passami Va. i.e. (I) see you. 

e amhakarh-us. ap. passasi-(you) see, av. i.e. (You) see us. 

* amhe passasi và. i.e. (You) see us. 

Yo'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “yo” for? 

To show that the examples below are inapplicable as they 
are not of “yo” vibhatti, but of “hi” vibhatti. 

* tumhehi-with/by you. * amhehi-with/by us. 


279 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


appathamo’ ti kimattham? 

What is the word “appathamo” for? 

To show that the examples below are inapplicable as they 
are not of apathama (non-pathama) “yo” vibhatti. (They are 
pathama, nominative, plural “yo”) 

gacchatha-go. av. * tumhe-you. np. i.e. You go! 

gacchama-go. av. * mayam-we. np. i.e. We go. 


Va’ti vikappanatthena yonam am,anam honti. 


By the word “va” which has a specific *vikappana" mean- 
ing, the vibhatti *yo" (applied after tumha and amha), can 
change into “arh, anam". (accusative plural “yo” is applied. See 

both “arh, anam-functions" shown underlined below) 

° tumham. * tumhanar-you. 

° amham. ° amhanarh-we, us. ap. 


१६३, २४०. सस्सं 
163, 240. Sassa’m. [Sassa*am. 2 words] 
[V] Tehi tumha-amhehi sassa vibhattissa arh-adeso hoti va. 


The catuttht and chattht singular vibhatti “sa”, which is ap- 
plied after *tumha and amha" sometimes changes into 
“arn”. [See function shown underlined. The second is inapplicable] 


[catutthi] ° tumharh-for you. ds. dtyate-given. av. 

* tava diyate. (inapplicable, but the same meaning) 

[chatti] ° tumharh-your. gs. pariggaho-possession. nv. 

* tava pariggaho. (The same meaning) 

[catutthi] ° amharh-for me. diyate-given. * mama diyate. 
[chattt] * amham-my. pariggaho. * mama pariggaho. 
Sasse'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “sassa” for? To show that the examples 
below are inapplicable as they are not of "sa", but of "su". 
* tumhesu-in you. * amhesu-in us. lp. 


280 


Nama Kappa 


१६४, २००. सब्बनामकारते पठमो 
164, 200. Sabbanama’karate’ pathamo. 
[Sabbanama-akaratot+e+pathamo. 3 words] 
[V] Sabbesam sabbanamanam akarato yo pathamo 
etta’mapajjate. 


The pathama plural vibhatti “yo” which is applied after a- 


ending Sabbanama nouns, changes into “e”. 

[a-ending Sabbanama nouns are ya, ta, eta, ima and sabba etc. of mas- 
culine and neuter genders except amu and Sabbanama nouns of femi- 
nine gender. The function “6” is shown in bold, underlined below] 


* sabbe-all. * ye-which. * te-those. * ke-who/what. 

* tumhe-you. * amhe-we. * ime-these. np. 

Sabbanama'ti kimattham? 

What is the word *sabbanama" for? 

To show that the examples below are inapplicable as they 
are not Sabbanama nouns. 

* deva-deities. * asura-demons. * naga-dragons. 

* gandhabba-celestial musician deities. * manussa-humans. (all 
np.) 

Akarato'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “akarato” for? 

To show that the example below is inapplicable as it does 
not end in “a”, but ends in “प”. 

* amü purisa-so and so men. np. titthanti-stand. av. 


Yo'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “‘yo” for? To show that the examples be- 
low are inapplicable as they are not of “yo”, but of "si" 
vibhatti. 

* sabbo-all. * yo-which. * so-that. * ko-who/what. * ayam-this. 
(all ns.) 

Pathamaggahanarh uttarasutta'ttham. 

[uttara-the next+sutta-Sutta+attharh-for] 

The word *pathama" in Sutta is meant to follow to the next 
Sutta. [See it in the next Sutta] 


281 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


१६५, २०८. Gast वा 

165, 208. Dvandattha va. [Dvandattha+va. 2 words] 

[V] Tasma sabbanama’karato dvandattha yo pathamo 
etta’mapajjate va. 


The pathama plural vibhatti “yo” which is applied after 
Sabbanama nouns in a Dvanda-samasa compound, some- 
times changes into “e”. 

[See “e” shown in bold, underlined in the example below. The second is 
inapplicable example, but the same meaning] 


e katara,katame-what and which. * katara,katama va. 


Sabbanama'ti kimattham"? 

What is the word *sabbanama" for? 

To show that in the example below, there is no sabbanama 
word in it despite being a dvanda compound. So, it is inap- 
plicable. 

* deva’sura,naga,gandhabba,manussa-deities, demons, dragons, 
musician deities and humans. 

Dvandattha'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “dvandattha” for? To show that the exam- 


ple below is not a dvanda compound. So, it is inapplicable. 
(They are only ordinary Sabbanama nouns) 
* te-those. * sabbe-all. (all np, ap) 


१६६, २०९. नाञ्ञं सब्बनामिकं 

166, 209. N?’ fiiam sabbanamikam. 
[Na-afiftiam-sabbanamikam. 3 words] 

[V] Sabbanamikanam dvandatthe na'fifiam karryam hoti. 


The morphological functions such as “ssam, ssanam" and 
so forth, are not to be carried out for Sabbanama nouns in a 
Dvanda-samasa compound except some function of chang- 
ing nominative plural “yo” into “e”. 

[This Sutta debars morphological functions such as “ssar, ssanam" 
and so forth, for Sabbanama nouns in a Dvanda-samasa.] 


282 


Nàma Kappa 


e pubba’ paranarh-the east and west or the front and rear. 
e pubbu'ttarànam-east and north. 
* adharu’ ttaranarh-down and north. dp, gp. 


१६७, २१०. बहुब्बीहिम्हि च 

167, 210. Bahubbthimhi ca. [Bahubbihimhi-ca. 2 words] 

[V] Bahubbthimhi ca samase sabbanamavidhanafi'ca na' fiiam 
kariyam hoti. 
In a Bahubbthi samasa (Attributive compound), no other 
morphological procedures (except “e” function of yo"), are 


to be carried out for Sabbanama nouns. [Similar debarring func- 

tion] 

* piyapubbaya-of the woman who have had ex-husband or ex-lover 
before. ds, gs. 

e piyapubbanarh-of those who have had ex-spouse or ex-lover 
before. dp, gp. 

* piyapubbe. /s. * piyapubbassa. ds, gs. (the same meaning but in 
different case-ending) 

Ce'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “ca” for? 

Sabbanamavidhanam hoti. [sabbanama--vidhanam-function] 

To show that some morphological functions of “ssar, ssa” 

are allowed (as an exception) in some examples below for 

those compound nouns in “smim, sa" vibhattis. (See allowed 

functions of *ssam and ssa” shown underlined). 

e dakkhinapubbassam-South-east. 15. 

e dakkhinapubbassa-South-east. ds, gs. 

e uttarapubbassarh-North-east. Is. 

* uttarapubbassa-North-east. ds, gs. 





283 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


१६८, 303. सब्बतो नं duri 
168, 203. Sabbato nam sam,sanam. 
[Sabbato+narh+sarh, sanam. 3 words] 
[V] Sabbato sabbanamato namvacanassa sam,sanam-icce'te 
adesa honti. 


The catutth1, chattht plural vibhatti “ nam" which is applied 
after the Sabbanama nouns changes into “sath, sanam". 
[See both functions in the examples below shown underlined] 


[Masculine & Neuter] ° sabbesam. ° sabbesanarm. 
[Feminine] ® sabbasarh. ° sabbasanarh-all. 
[M & N] * yesam. * yesanam. 

[F] * yasam. * yasanam. 

[M & N] * tesam. * tesanam. 

[F] ° tasarh. ° tasanam. 
[ 
[ 
[ 
[ 
[ 











F] ° kasar. ° kasanam. 

M & N] * imesam. ° imesanam. 

F] ° imasam. ° imasanam. 

M, N & F] ° amüsam. ° amüsanam-so and so. (all dp, gp) 




















Na' miti kimattham? 

What is the word “nam” for? To show that examples below 
are inapplicable as they are not of *nam", but of “sa”. 

* sabbassa, * yassa, * tassa, * kassa. (all ds, gs) 

Evam sabbattha. 

Evam-(Should note) in this way or thus. sabbattha-at all examples of 
Sabbanama nouns. 


१६९, ११७. राजस्स राजु सुनंहिसु च 
169, 117. Rajassa raju su,nam,hi,su ca. 
[Rajassa+raju+su, nam, hi, sut+ca. 4 words] 
[V] Sabbasse'va rajasaddassa raju-adeso hoti 
su,narh,hi-iccetesu. 


The whole word “raja (king)? changes into *raju" when 
“su, nam, hi" vibhattis are applied after it. 


284 


Nàma Kappa 


e rájüsu-in kings. ® rajünam-of kings. ® rajühi, ° rajubhi-with/by 
kings. [“u” is lengthened by 89] 

Sunaiühisü'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “sunamhisu” for? To show that the exam- 
ple below is inapplicable as it is not of “su, nam, hi” 
vibhattis, but of “s1”. 

* raja-king. 

Caggahana’ mavadharana ’ttharh. 

The word “ca” has a purpose of restricting the function of 
Sutta in the examples below. 

* rajesu,* rajanam,* rajehi,* rajebhi. (the same meaning as those 
of Sutta) 


१७०, 330. सब्बस्सिमस्से वा 
170, 220. Sabbassi" masse" va. 
[Sabbassat+imassat+e+va. 4 words] 
[V] Sabbasse'va imasaddassa ekaro hoti và 
su,nam,hi-icce’tesu. 


The entire word “ima (this)" sometimes changes into “6” 
when “su, nam, hi" vibhattis are applied after it. (See “e” 
shown in bold, in the examples below. Second is inapplicable one.) 


[M & N] * esu, * imesu-in these, /p, 

[M & N] ° esam, * imesarh-of these, dp, gp, 

[M & N] * ehi, * ebhi, * imehi, * imebhi-with/by these. ip, abp, 
Imasse'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “imassa” for? To show that examples be- 
low are inapplicable as they are not “ima, but eta-that". 

[M & N] * etesu, * etesarh, * etehi, * etebhi-with/by those. 
Note: The function of Sutta is applicable only to “ima” Sabbana- 
ma noun of masculine and neuter gender. 








285 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


१७१, २१९. अनिमि नाम्हि च 

171 5 219. Ani’mi nāmhi ca. [Ana, imi+nāmhi+ca. 3 words] 

[V] Imasaddassa sabbasse'va ana,imi-iccete adesa honti 
namhi vibhattimhi. 


The whole word “ima (this)" changes into “ana, imi" when 


tatiya singular “nā” vibhatti is applied after it. 
[The functions are shown in bold, underlined] 


* anena dhammadanena, sukhita hotu sa paja. 

[Trans] ° anena-by this. is, dhammadanena-gift of Dhamma, is, 
sukhita-happy. ns (adj), hotu-may be. av, sā paja-that (community 
of living) beings. ns. 

i.e. By this gift of Dhamma, may that community of beings be happy! 
* imina buddhapüjena, patvana amatam padam. 

[Trans] ® Iminà-by this. is, buddhapüjena-act of worshipping of 
lord Buddha, is, patvana-having reached, kv. amatarh padarh-to 
the deathless Nibbana. as, 

i.e. Having attained the deathless state of Nibbana by this act of honor- 
ing of the Lord Buddha. (Both are Pali stanzas) 

Namhr’ti kimattharh? 

What is the word “namhi” for? To show that examples be- 
low are inapplicable as they are not of “na” vibhatti, but of 
“su, nam, hi". 

* imesu, lp, * imesam, dp, gp, * imehi, * imebhi. ip, abp, 


286 


Nama Kappa 


१७२, २१८. अनपुंसकस्सायं सिम्हि 
172, 218. Anapurhsakassã’ yarn’! simhi. 
[Anapumsakassatayam-tsimhi. 3 words] 

[V] Imasaddassa sabbasse’va anapumsakassa ayarh-adeso hoti 
simhi vibhattimhi. 
The whole word “ima” belonging to non-neuter gender, 
changes into “ayam” when pathama singular "si" vibhatti is 
applied after it. (Non-neuter means masculine and feminine gender. 
The function is shown underlined.) 


[Masculine gender example] * ayam puriso-this man, ns, 
[Feminine gender example] * ayarh itthi-this woman. ns, 


Anapumsakasse’ti kimattham? 

What is the word *anapumsakassa" for? 

To show that example below is inapplicable as it is a neuter 
gender word. 

* idar cittam-this mind. titthati-exists. 

Simhr ti kimattham? 

What is the word *simhi" for? 

To show that example below is inapplicable as it is not of 
“si” vibhatti, but of *am". 

* imam purisam-this man. as, passasi-See. av, tvam-(Do) you. 
ns, i.e. do you see this man? 


?! Please note that all Sabbanama nouns such as ya, ta, eta, ima, amu, kim 
etc., are of three genders. Depending on gender, their word-forms too change. 
For example, the word “ima” of neuter gender in nominative singular case 
will be differently formed and declined from “ima” of masculine and femi- 
nine genders in the same case-ending. The same is similarly applicable to 
other Sabbanama nouns. That is why there are different Suttas prescribing 
different morphological rules and procedures. 


287 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


१७३, २२३. अमुस्स मो d 

173, 223. Amussa mo sam. [Amussa*mo-sam. 3 words] 

[V] Amusaddassa anapumsakassa makaro sakara' mapajjate va 
simhi vibhattimhi. 
The consonant “m” of the word “amu (so and so) " changes 


into "s" when pathama singular “si” vibhatti is behind it. 
[See the function shown in bold, underlined] 


e asu ràjà-so and so king, ns. * asu itth1-so and so woman, ns. 

* amuko raja, * amuka itthi. ns. (Inapplicable examples with an 
extra “k” added behind, meaning is the same though) 
Anapumsakasse’ti kimattham? 

What is the word *anapumsakassa" for? To show that the 


example below is inapplicable as it is a neuter gender word. 
(The function of Sutta is meant for non-neuter gender word “amu” on- 
ly) 


* adurh-so and so. puppham-flower. ns, virocati-looks beautiful. 
av. 

Amusse'ti kimattharh? 

What is the word “amussa” for? 

To show that the example shown is inapplicable as it is not 
“amu”, but of “ima (this)". 

* ayam puriso-this man. ns. titthati-stands. av. 

Simhr’ti kimattharh? 

What is the word “simhi” for? To show that example below 
is inapplicable as it is not of “si”. 

* amum purisam-so and so man. as. passasi-(Do you) see. av. 

i.e. (do you) see so and so man? 


288 


Nama Kappa 


१७४, २११. एततेसं सो 

174, 211. Eta,tesam so. [Eta, tesarn+so. 2 words] 

[V] Eta, ta-icce’tesarh anapumsakanam takaro 
sakarama'pajjate simhi vibhattimhi. 
The consonant “t” of the non-neuter-gender Sabbanama 
word “eta, ta (that)" changes into “s” when a pathama 
singular “si” vibhatti is applied after it. [See changed “s” shown 
in bold, underlined] 
Note: In majority of texts, it is found as “Etatesarh to”. As the main 
function of the Sutta is to change “t” of eta and ta into “s”, “so” is 
more relevant and aptly reflective of the function. 
In Moggalana Pali grammar text, Syadi chapter, there is a Sutta (num- 
ber 128) with the same function titled “tyate’tanam tassa so”. 
In Panini, there is also a Sutta with similar function. It is *tadoh sah 
savanantyayo" (तदोः सः सावनन्त्ययो 7-2-106). In view of those two Sut- 
tas which use the word “so ” and “सः” , “so” is a more likely relevant 
and correct text. 
[Examples of “eta”, Masculine] * eso puriso-that man. 
[Feminine] * esa itthi-that woman. 
[Examples of “ta”, Masculine] * So puriso-that man. 
[Feminine] ® sā itthi-that woman (all ns) 
Etatesa'miti kimattham? 
What is the word “etatesarh” for? 
To show that the examples below are inapplicable as they 
are not “eta, ta”, but *itara-other". 
[Masculine] * itaro-the other. puriso-man, ns. 
[Feminine] * itara itthi-the other woman. ns. 


Anapumsakana'miti kimattham? 

What is the word *anapumsakanam" for? 

[See this word in the Vutti of Sutta] 

To show that the examples below are inapplicable as they 
are not non-neuter gender words, but of neuter genders. 
[Examples of “eta” Neuter] * etam cittam-that mind. 

* etam rüpam-that matter. 


[Examples of “ta” Neuter] * tar cittam,* tam rüpar. ns, as. 
(the same meaning) 


289 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


१७५, २१२. तस्स वा नत्तं सब्बत्थ 
175, 212. Tassa va nattam sabbattha. 
[Tassa-*va-*nattam-sabbattha. 4 words] 
[V] Tassa sabbanamassa takarassa nattam hoti va sabbattha 
lingesu. 


The consonant “t” of the word “ta (that)? sometimes chang- 


es into "n" for “ta” of all gender and in all cases. 
[See the function in the first word of each set of examples shown in 
bold, underlined. The second is inapplicable one.] 


[Feminine] * naya, * taya, is. 

[M & N] * nam, * tam, as. 

[M & N] * ne, * te, np, ap. 

[M & N] ° nesu, * tesu, lp. 

[M & N] * namhi, * tamhi, Js. 
[Feminine] * nahi, * tahi, ip, abp. 
[Feminine] * nabhi, * tabhi. ip, abp. 


१७६, २१३. सस्मास्मिसंसास्वत्तं 
176, 213. Sa,sma,smim.,sam,sasva’ttarn. 
[Sa, sma, smim, sam, sasutattarh. 2 words] 
[V] Tassa sabbanamassa takarassa sabbasse'va attam hoti và 
sa,sma,smim,sarh,sa-icce’tesu sabbattha lingesu. 


The whole sabbanama word “ta (that)? sometimes changes 
into “a” in all gender and in sa, sma, smim, vibhatti cases, 
as well as when sam, sa morphemes are already applied af- 
ter it. 

Note: This Sutta sometimes changes the whole “ta” into “a” 
in three sa, sma, smith cases and those with sar, sa, func- 


tion already applied. [See the applied function “a” in the first ex- 
ample of each set shown in bold, underlined] 


[sa, in m & n] * assa, * tassa. 
[sma in m & n] * asma, * tasma. 
[smir in m & n] * asmim, * tasmim. 


290 


Nama Kappa 


[smirh, feminine with sarn] * assam, * tassam. 
[sa, feminine with sa] * assa, * tassa. 


Takarasse'ti kimattharh? 

What is the word “takarassa” for? 

To show that example below is inapplicable as it is not a 
"ta", but “amu”. 

[Feminine] * amussath, Is. * amussa. ds, gs. 


Etesvi ti kimattharn? What is the word “etesu” for? 

To show that examples below are inapplicable as they are 
not of “sa, sma, smith” vibhattis, but of “su”. 

[m & n] * nesu, * tesu-in those. lp. [See Sutta 175] 


१७७, २२१. SAME च 

177, 221. Imasaddassa ca. [Imasaddassa+ca. 2 words] 

[V] Imasaddassa ca sabbasse’va attam hoti va 
sa,sma,smim,sarh,sa-icce’tesu sabbattha lingesu. 


The whole “ima” sometimes changes into “a” for all gender 
and in sa, sma, smim vibhattis, also when sam, sa func- 
tions have already been applied after it. 

Note: This Sutta sometimes changes “ima” of all genders into “a” in 


a^? 


“sa, sma, smim" vibhatti-cases or when “sar or sa" functions have 
been already applied. The function “a” is shown in bold, underlined. 
Out of a pair of each examples, the second * marked is inapplicable. 
The unchanged “ima” is shown in the second example. It is quite simple 
to understand. 


[sa, m & n] * assa, * imassa-of this. 

[smà, m & n] * asma, * imasma. 

[smirh, m & n] ० asmim, * imasmim. 

[smirh, feminine with San] ° assam, * imissam. 

[sa, feminine with sa] * assa, * imissa. 

Imasaddasse'ti kimattham? 

What is the word *imasaddassa" for? 

To show that examples below are inapplicable as they are 
not “ima”, but of “eta”. 


291 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


[Feminine] * etissam, Is. * etissa. ds, gs. 

Note: In view of the function of these two Suttas 176-177, it is 
clear that “a” is to be regarded as a derivative morpheme of ei- 
ther “ta” or “ima”. 

So, whenever one comes across such words as “assa” or *asmim' 
and so on, correct interpretation should be made in accordance 
with context of the sentence. 


, 


१७८, २२४. सब्बतो को 
178, 224. Sabbato ko. [Sabbato+ko. 2 words] 


[V] Sabbato sabbanamato ka-kara'gamo hoti va simhi 
vibhattimhi. 


Sometimes, there should be a consonant “k” affixed after 
all sabbanama nouns in a patthama singular si-vibhatti. 

(See “k” shown in bold, underlined. This “k” is meaningless though it 
carries some meanings in some other words depending on context) 

* sabbako-all, * yako-which, * sako-that or one's own (Two mean- 
ings. The second meaning is widely used). 

* amuko, * asuko-so and so. ns (both the same meaning). 

Va'ti kimattham? What is the word “va” for? 

To show that examples below are inapplicable as indicated 
by the word “va”. 

* sabbo-all, * yo-which, * so-that, * ko-who/what. ns. 


Sabbanamato'ti kimattham? 

What is the word *sabbanamato" for? 

To show that example below is inapplicable as it is not a 
sabbanama noun. (It is an ordinary noun). Hence, inappli- 
cable. 

* puriso-man. ns. 


Puna sabbatoggahanena afifiasma’pi ka-kara' gamo hoti. 


By including the word "sabbato" in the Sutta again, the af- 
fix “ka” can also be affixed after other common nouns ra- 
ther than sabbanama nouns. 


292 


Nàma Kappa 


[See “k” shown underlined below. sabbato-means after all words] 
* hinako-lowly and mean person. * potako-the young one. ns. 


१७९, २०४. घपतो स्िंसानं संसा 
179, 204. Ghapato smim,sanam sam,sa. 
[Ghapato+smith, sanamrsam, sa. 3 words] 
[V] Sabbato sabbanamato gha,pa,safiriato 
smim,sa-icce'tesam sam,sa-adesa honti và yathasankhyam. 


The smim vibhatti applied after all gha, pa-termed, à , u- 
ending feminine gender sabbanama nouns sometimes 
changes into "sam". Also, the sa vibhatti which is applied 
after such nouns changes into “sā” respectively. 

[smirh>sarh. sa>sa] 

Note that out of a pair of each examples, the sam is in the first example, 
the sà function is in the second examples which are shown underlined. 
Each is reduplicated with an additional “s”. 


sabba-all, feminine gender, 
gha-termed, a-ending sabbanama noun. 
[sabba+smith. sarh function] ० sabbassam-in all. 
[sabba+sa, sa function] * sabbassa-of all. 
[sabba+smirh] * sabbayam. 
[sabba+sa] * sabbaya. (Same meaning as the first set) 





ima-this, feminine gender 
gha-termed, a-ending sabbanama noun. 
[ima+smirh] ® imissath-in this. [ima+sa] * iMmisSa-of this. 
[ima*smim] * imayam [ima+sa] * imaya (Same as the preceding 
set of examples) 





Amu-so and so, feminine gender, 

pa-termed, u-ending sabbanama noun. 
[amut+smirh] * amussam-in so and so. 
[amutsa] * amussa-of so and so. 
[amu-*smim] * amuyarh. 
[amutsa] * amuya. (Same as the preceding set of examples) 
Note: Those shown inside the bracket are the original forms based on 
gender and case before any morphological process is being carried out. 





293 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


Sabbanamato’ti kimattham"? 

What is the word “sabbanamato” for? 

To show that examples below are inapplicable as they are 
not sabbanama nouns. 

* itthiyarh-in woman, ls. * itthiya-of woman. ds, gs. 
Smiim,sana' miti kimattham"? 

What is the word “smir, sanam" for? 

To show that example below is inapplicable as it is not of 
“smith, sa” vibhatti. (It is of “yo”’.) 

* amuyo-so and so women/ those women. np, ap. 


१८०, २०७. नेताहि स्मिमायया 
180, 207. Ne'tahi smi? maya ya. 
[Na+etahi+smim-+aya, ya. 4 words] 
[V] Etehi sabbanamehi gha,pasafifiehi smirmvacanassa ne’va 
aya, ya-adesa honti. 


No “aya, ya” functions are to be performed for all those “a, 
u-ending, gha, pa-termed sabbanama nouns in smim 
vibhatti (locative case). [This Sutta debars “aya, ya” function in à, 


u-ending Sabbanama nouns of feminine gender in smith vibhatti loca- 
tive-case.] 


[gha-termed, 4-ending “eta”] ® etissam, ® etayam-in that woman. 
[gha-termed, 4-ending *ima"] ® missam, ® imayam-in this woman. 
[pa-termed, u-ending *amu"] * amussam, * amuyarm-in so and so 
woman. (all /s). 
Smirh’nti kimattham? 
What is the word “smith” for? 
To show that examples below are inapplicable as they are 
not of *smim" vibhatti, but of *chatthi sa". So, there is an 
“aya, ya” function applied. 
* taya * itthtya-of that woman gs. mukham-face. nv. 

i.e. that woman's face. 
Etahr’ti kimattham? 
What is the word “etāhi” for? 


294 


Nàma Kappa 


To show that examples below are inapplicable as they are 
not of *smim" vibhatti. (they are of “catutthi & chattht sa". So, 
there is an "aya" procedure applied. The restriction of this Sutta is void) 
* kafifiaya, * vinaya, * gangaya. (Refer to Sutta No. 111, 112) 

* kapalikaya-piece of broken earthen jar. ds, gs. 


१८१, ९५. मनोगणादितो स्मिनान मिआ 
181, 95. Manogana'dito smim,na,na' mi, a. 
[Manogana-adito*smim, na, narh+i, a. 3 words] 
[V] Tasma manogana'dito smim,na-icce'tesam 
ikara,akara'desa honti va yathasankhyam. 


The smim, na vibhattis applied after “mano (mind)" etc., 
sometimes change into “i, a" respectively. 

[smim>i, na >a. After changing into i & 4, an "s" is attached to them as 
per Sutta No.184>si, sa. See both functions shown underlined. The sec- 
ond example is inapplicable.] 


* manasi, * manasmim-in the mind. Is. [mana-mind] 

e sirasi, * sirasmim-in the head. Is. [sira-head] 

* manasa, * manena-with/by mind. is. 

* vacasa, * vacena-with/by speech, is. [vaca-speech] 

* sirasa, * sirena-with/by head is. 

* sarasa,* sarena-with/by arrow, sound or pond, is. [sara-arrow, 
sound, pond] 

* tapasa,* tapena-with/by act of austerity, heat, is. [tapa-Austerity, 
heat] 

० vayasa, * vayena-with/by age, is. [vaya-phase of life, age] 

० yasasa, * yasena-with/by fame or following, is. 
[yasa-fame or retinue] 

* tejasa, * tejena-with/by power, is. [teja-power] 

* urasa, * urena-with/by chest, is. [ura-bosom, chest] 

* thamasa, * thamena-with/by strength. is. [thama-power, 
strength] 

Smim,nana' miti kimattham"? 

What is the word *smimnanam" for? 

To show that examples below are inapplicable as they are 


295 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


not of “smith, na” vibhatti. (They are of "si". 

* mano-mind. * siro-head. * tamo-darkness. 

* tapo-austerity practice, * tejo-power. all ns. 

Adiggahanena afifiasma'pi smim,nanam ikara,akara’desa 

honti. 

By means of the word “adi” comprised in the Sutta, the 

vibhattis “smim, na” applied after other nouns rather than 

“mana” can also change into “i and a" respectively. 

e bilasi-at hole or den, Is. ® bilasa-with/by hole, is. [bila-hole] 

e padasi-in word or foot, ls. ® padasa-with/by word or foot. is. 
[pada-word, foot] 


१८२, ९७. सस्स चो 
182, 97. Sassa co’. [Sassat+cato. 3 words] 
[V] Tasma manogana’ dito sassa ca okaro hoti. 


The “sa” vibhatti, applied after that noun word mano and 
so on, changes into “0”. 

Note: After changing into an “o”, an “s” is attached before it as per Sut- 
ta 184. See the function shown underlined in the examples. 


* manaso-of mind. * thamaso- of strength. 
* tapaso- of austerity practice. ds, gs. 


१८३, ४८. एतेस मो लोपे 

183, 48. Etesa’mo lope. [Etesarn+o+lope. 3 words] 

[V] Etesam manogana’dinam anto otta’mapajjate vibhattilope 
kate. 


After eliding the applied-vibhattis, the last component vow- 
el *a" of those mano-group nouns, changes into “0”. 


Summary: This Sutta changes the last vowel of mano- 
group nouns such as aya-iron, teja-power and so on, which 
are joined in a compound noun into “o”. This must be done 
after the applied vibhatti (case-endings) are deleted. 
Note: The examples shown are compound nouns where the mano- 


296 


Nàma Kappa 


group nouns such as aya, teja, tapa, constitute the first component. 
Normally, most component words comprised in a compound process 
lost their distinctive genders, vibhattis (case-endings) as they have to be 
elided. But these groups can retain their salient characteristic “02 as 
per this Sutta even after it becomes a complete compound. (See the 
changed “0” shown underlined) 


e manomayam-mind-made (mind-generated). ० ayomayam-iron- 
made. (made of iron) ms. * tejosamena-with/by flame-like. 
* tapogunena-with/by virtue of austerity. * siroruhena-with/by 
head-grown hair. is. 


Adiggahanarh kima'ttharn? 

For what purpose the word “adi” is included in the Vutti of 
Sutta? (refer to the word *manoganàdinam") 

Afifiesa' manto otta’ma’ pajjate. 

To show that changing into “0” can occur in other nouns 
too. 

Note: This function enjoined by component part word “adi” is very 
much the same as the main function of Sutta. 

* aposamena-with/by water-like. * vayosamena with/by air-like. 
is. 

Lope'ti kimattharh? What is the word “lope” for? 

To show that examples below are inapplicable as they have 
no “lopa-elision procedure". 

* padasa-with/by word or foot. * tapasa- with/by austerity. 

* yasasa-with/by fame. * vacasa-with/by speech. 

* manasa-with/by mind, is. 

eva'mafitie'pi yojetabba. 

Thus, other examples too should be applied. 


297 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


१८४, ९६. स सरे वागमो 

184, 96. Sa sare va'gamo. [Sat+sare+vat+agamo. 4 words] 

[V] Etehe'va manogana’dihi vibhatta'dese sare pare 
sakara’gamo hoti va. 


After changing of the smith, na vibhattis into “i & a" (as per 
Sutta No.181), an “s” should be inserted in front of those 
vowels and be combined to those vowels “i and a". 


Summary: This Sutta enjoins to insert an "s" in front of “i 
and a" after which it becomes si & sa. See the function be- 
low shown underlined. 


[sa] * manasa-with/by mind. * vacasa-with/by speech. is. 

[si] * manasi-in mind. * vacasi-in speech. Is. 

Va’ti kimattham? 

What is the word “va” for? 

To show that examples below are inapplicable as restricted 
by the word “va” 

* manena-with/by mind. * tejena-with/by power. 

* yasena--with/by fame. is. 


Sare'ti kimattham? 

What is the word "sare" for? 

To show that the examples below are inapplicable as they 
have no “vibhatti-derivative morpheme vowel i or a". 

* mano-mind. * tejo-power. * yaso-fame. ns. 


Puna adiggahanena afifiasmim'pi paccaye pare sakaragamo 
hoti. 


By including the word “adi” in the Vutti again, the inserting 
of “sa” can also be applied in other nouns with “Taddhita- 
affix”. 


[See the applied *s" shown underlined in the examples carefully. They 
are affixed with a Taddhita affix “ika”. The “arn” is case-ending] 
* manasikam-the mind-related. * vacasikam-the speech-related. ns. 


298 


Nama Kappa 


१८५, ११२. सन्तसद्दस्स सो भे बो aed 
185, 112. Santasaddassa so bhe bo ca’nte. 
[Santasaddassa+so+bhet+botcatante. 6] 
[V] Sabbassa santasaddassa sakara’deso hoti bhakare pare, an- 
te ca bakara'gamo hoti. 


The entire word "santa (saint)", changes into “sa” when a 
morpheme “bhi” is present behind. Additionally, an extra 
“b” has to be added to “bhi”. [Santa>sa+b+bhi>Sabbhil]. 

(See the function-applied examples shown in bold, underlined.) 

Note: There are two kinds of “bha”: 

(1) one is a vibhatti-derivative morpheme bha from “bhi” as per Sutta 


No. 99. 
(2) the other is just an ordinary bha of the root word bhu etc. 


The First Stanza 
Examples in the stanza are shown in bold. Word-for-word detailed 
translation is provided for more detailed in-depth understanding of each 
word and the whole stanza. 


* sabbhi'reva samasetha, 

e sabbhi kubbetha santhavam. 

satam saddhamma' maíifiaya, 

seyyo hoti na papiyo. 

(Sandhi) Sabbhi'reva- Sabbhi-eva. 

saddhamma'mafifiaya- saddhammam-afifíaya. 
[Trans] Sabbhi-with good people, or saints. ip. eva-only, ind. 
samasetha-should congregate, or associate. av. sabbhi-with good 
people, or saints. ip. kubbetha-should be done. av. santhavam- 
friendship. as. satam-of saints. gp. saddhammarh-noble teaching or 
noble way of saints. as. afifiaya-having known, kv. SeyyO-more 
noble. tn, ns. hoti-is. av. na-not. ind. papiyo-evil or bad. tn, ns. 


The First Stanza in English 
(One) should associate only with the saints. 
The friendship should be done with the saints. 
Knowing the noble way of saints, 
Is more noble and is not evil. 


299 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


The Second Stanza 
Jiranti ve rajaratha sucitta, 
atho sartram’pi jaram upeti. 
satafi’ca dhammo na jaram upeti, 
santo have * sabbhi pavedayanti. 


(Sandhi) sariram'pi-sariram-api. satafi’ca=satarhtca. 

[Trans] Jiranti-gets old, dilapidated, av. ve-really, ind. rajaratha-the 
king's chariots. cn, np. Sucitta-wonderful. cn, np, adj. atho-besides, 
ind. Sarirarh-the body. ns. api-also. ind. jararh-to the (state of being) 
old. as. upeti-approaches. av. satarh-of the saints. gp. ca-however, 
ind. dhammo-(the noble) Dhamma. ns. na-not. ind. jaram-to getting 
old. as. upeti- approaches. av. [upeti=upa-nearteti-gets, i.e. approach- 
es.] Santo-saints. np. have-in fact. ind. * sabbhi-with saints. ip. 
pavedayanti-made known, praise. ay. 


The Second Stanza in English 
Really, the wonderful royal chariots of the king 
fall into decay. Besides, the body too gets old. 
But, the way of saints does not get old (by being out of 
fashion). 
The saints, in fact, are to be known by saints (only). 
The two examples below are compound nouns with an ordinary bha 
where the function of this Sutta is applied. 
e sabbhüto-being a saint. cn, ns. [santa-saint+bhiita-being] 
* sabbhavo-being in a state of saint. cn, ns. [santa-saint+bhava- 
being in a state of. One more “b” is reduplicated] 
Bhe'ti kimattharh? 
What is the word “bhe” for? 
To show that example below is inapplicable as it does not 
have a vibhatti-morpheme “bh” of “bhi” in it. (Example 
shown below has only a “hi”, not a *bhi") 


* santehi-by saints. ip. püjito-is honored. kv. bhagava-the Lord 
Buddha. (ns in accusative sense, passive voice sentence). 
i.e. Buddha is honored by saints. 


Caggahanam kvaci sakarasse'va pasiddhattham. 


300 


Nàma Kappa 


The word “ca” in the Sutta has a purpose of affecting to 


change "santa" into "sa" in certain words as shown below. 
(See changed “sa” in both examples shown below. They are in Kita- 
affixes) 

० sakkaro-the saint’s act. kn. i.e. devotion, practice of Dhamma etc. 
[santa-saints+karo-act] 

* sakkato-by saints+done. ky. i.e. an act done by saints. [santa- 
saints+kato-done. One more “k” is reduplicated in both examples] 
Note: In both examples, sa is assumed to be derived from santa. How- 
ever, it can also be derivative of an upasagga “sarh-well, respectfully”. 
In such case, sakkaro-means act of devotion. Sakkato-means done 
well, respectfully. This is widely found in the canonical texts. 

The words can be brought to completion by eliding the niggahita “m” 
of upasagga and augmenting with one more “k”. 


१८६, १०७. सिम्हि गच्छन्तादीनं न्तसद्दो अं 

186, 107. Simhi gacchanta’dinam ntasaddo? am. 
[Simhi*gacchanta-adinam-4nta-saddo-*am. 4 words] 

[V] Simhi gacchanta’dinarh nta-saddo am-apajjate va. 


The affix “nta”? of the word gacchanta etc., sometimes 
changes into "am" when a "si" Vibhatti is applied after 
them. 

See each pairs of examples. Both “am and anto" are shown in bold so 
that students can easily distinguish between the applied example and 


inapplicable examples. The second one "marked is inapplicable exam- 
ple. 


e gaccham, * gacchanto-the one who goes, while going. 

* maham, * mahanto-the one who is great or honorable. 

* caram, * caranto-the one who goes, while going. 

e khadarh, * khadanto-the one who munches, while munching. ns. 


22 Ntasaddo-refers to those nouns affixed with “nta” affix. This nta is the 
last component part of “anta” affix applied by Sutta No. 565 which is widely 
used as a present participle affix for many Kita nouns. Ntasaddo means any 


noun affixed with “anta” but note that the letter “a” is left out in this expres- 
sion and simply stated as “ntasaddo”. [nta=nta, saddo=word]. 


301 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


Gacchantadina' miti kimattham? 

What is the word “gacchantadinath” for? 

To show that examples below are inapplicable as they do not be- 
long to “nta-affixed, gacchantadi-noun group" though they may 
seem like nta-affixed nouns. (They are in fact Kita ta-affixed verbal 
nouns) 

* anto-afflicted. * danto-tamed. * vanto-vomitted. * santo- 
peaceful. (Refer to Sutta 584 for details and relevant function of these 
examples). 





१८७, १०८. dg न्तुव 

187, 108. Sesesu ntu’va. [Sesesu+ntutiva. 3 words] 

[V] Gacchanta' dinam ntasaddo ntuppaccayo' va datthabbo 
sesesu vibhattipaccayesu. 


The affix nta has to be recognized as an equal to ntu-affix 
except for nta-affixed nouns in si-vibhatti. 


Q: Why "nta" has to be recognized like “ntu”? 

A: The purpose of equating nta with ntu is to enable to per- 
form necessary morphological procedures in the same way 
as ntu-affixed nouns, such as changing nta-affixed nouns 
into “10, ti, ta" and so forth. 


[to, ti, ta” functions are shown underlined in the examples. Refer to 
Sutta 127 for this function.] 


(1) * gacchato-of goer. e mahato-of great person. ds, gs. 

(2) * gacchati-in goer. * mahati-in great person. Is. 

Note: This second type of word form is easily confusable with an 
Akhyata verb with “ti” termination. 

(3) * gacchata-with/by goer. ० mahatà- with/by great person. is. 


Sesesü'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “sesesu” for? 

To show that the examples below are inapplicable as they 
are of “si” vibhatti. (The function for si-vibhatti-applied, ntu-affixed 
nouns is already mentioned in Sutta No.186. So, it has to be excluded.) 
* gaccham, * maharh, * caram, * khadam. (Refer to preceding 
Sutta 186) 


302 


Nama Kappa 


१८८, ११५. ब्रह्यत्तसखराजादितो अ मानं 


188,115. Brahma'tta,sakha,raja' dito a^ manam. 
[Brahma, atta, sakha, raja-adito--amanam. 3 words] 
[V] Brahma,atta,sakha,raja-icceva' madito am-vacanassa 
anam hoti va. 
The "am" vibhatti applied after the noun words “brahma, 
atta, sakha, raja" etc., sometimes changes into "anam". 
(The applied function of *anam" is shown underlined in the first. The 
second is inapplicable example) 


* brahmanam, * brahmarh-to the holy Brahma, God. 

० attanam, * attam- to oneself (reflexive pronoun), soul. 

e sakhanam, * sakharh- to the friend. 

e rajanarh, * rajarh- to the king. as. 

A'miti kimattham"? 

What is the word “am” for? 

To show that example below is inapplicable as it is not of 
an “arh” vibhatti. (It is of si") 

* rajà-the king. ns. 





१८९, 223. WT च 

189, 113. Sya’ Ca. [Sita+ca. 3 words] 

[V] Brahma, atta,sakha,raja-icceva’ madito si-vacanassa 
a-ca hoti. 


The “si” vibhatti applied after the noun words brahma, at- 
ta, sakha, raja etc., changes into “a”. 
[See the applied function of “a” shown underlined below. ] 


e brahma, ® atta, ° sakha, ° raja, ° atuma-body, oneself. ns. 


303 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


१९०, ११४. योन मानो 

190, 114. Yona' mano. [Yonari-àno. 2 words] 

[V] Brahma,atta,sakha,raja-icce’va’madito yonam 
ano-adeso hoti. 


The “yo” vibhatti applied after the noun words brahma, 
atta, sakha, raja etc., changes into “āno”. 


ea 


[See the applied function *ano" shown underlined] 


e brahmano-the Brahmas, holy Gods. ® attano, ® sakhano, 
e rajano, ® atumàno. np, ap. 


१९१, १३०. सखतो चायो नो 
191, 130. Sakhato ca’yo no. [Sakhato+ca+tayo, no. 3 words] 
[V] Tasma sakhato ca yonam ayo,no-adesa honti. 
The *yo" vibhatti applied after the noun word sakha 
changes into “ayo, no". 


ea 


[See the applied function of “ayo and no” shown underlined. The first 
is ayo-function, the second example is no-function] 

* sakhayo, * sakhino-friends. np, ap. 

Yona'miti kimattharh? 

What is the word *yonam" for? To show that example be- 
low is inapplicable as it is not of “yo” vibhatti. (It is of 
“si”.) 

* sakha-friend. ns. 


१९२, १३५. स्मिमे 
192, 135. Smi' me. [Smiin-e. 2 words] 
[V] Tasma sakhato smimvacanassa e-karo hoti. 


The “smirh” vibhatti applied after the noun word sakha 


6699 


changes into “e”. [See the applied function “e” shown underlined] 


* sakhe-in friend. Js. 


304 


Nàma Kappa 


१९३, १२२. ब्रह्मतो गस्स च 
193, 122. Brahmato gassa ca. [Brahmato+gassatca. 3 words] 
[V] Tasma brahmato gassa ca ekaro hoti. 


The vocative singular “si” vibhatti formally termed as “ga” 
and applied after the noun word brahma, changes into “e”. 
[See the applied function “e” shown underlined] 


he ® brahme!-Oh Brahma!, Oh holy God! vs. 


१९४, १३१. सखन्तस्सि नोनानंसेसु 

194, 131. Sakha’ntassi’ no,na,nam,sesu. 
[Sakha-antassa+i+no, na, nam, sesu. 3 words] 

[V] Tassa sakha’ntassa ikaro hoti no,na,nam,sa-icce tesu. 


When “na, nam, sa" vibhattis and a morpheme “no” (Re: 
Sutta No.191) is being present behind, the last component 
vowel “a” of the word “sakha” changes into “i”. 


66९१9 


[See the applied function “i” shown in bold and underlined] 

[sa, no-function] ० sakhino-of friend. [na] * sakhina-with/by friend. 
[nam] ° sakhinarh-of friends. [sa] ° sakhissa-of friend. 

Etesvr'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “etesu” for? 

To show that example below is inapplicable as it is not of 
“na, nam, sa" vibhatti. (It is of “hi”.) 

* sakharehi-with/ by friends. ip, abp. (See morphological function of 
this word in the next Sutta). 


१९५, १३४. आरो हिम्हि वा 
195, 134. Aro himhi va. [Aro+himhi+va. 3 words] 
[V] Tassa sakha'ntassa aro hoti va himhi vibhattimhi. 


The last component vowel “a” of “sakha” sometimes 
changes into “ara” when followed by vibhatti “hi”. 
[See the applied “ara” function shown underlined.] 


* sakharehi, * sakhehi-with/by/from friends. ip, abp. 


305 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


१९६, १३३. सुनमंसु वा 
196, 133. Suna’mam,su VÀ. [Su, narh, arhsu+va. 2 words] 
[V] Tassa sakha’ntassa aro hoti và su,narh,am-icce’tesu. 


The last component vowel “a” of “sakha” sometimes 
changes into “ara” when “su, nam, am" vibhattis are ap- 


plied after it. [See the applied function of “ara” shown underlined in 
the first examples of each. The second is inapplicable.] 


[su] * sakharesu, * sakhesu-in friends. 
[narn] ° sakharanam, * sakhinarh-of friends. 
[arn] * sakharam, * sakharh-to friend. 


१९७, १२५. ब्रह्मतो तु स्मिनि 

197, 125. Brahmato tu smim ni. 
[Brahmatot+tu+smimtni. 4 words] 

[V] Tasma brahmato smirh-vacanassa ni-adeso hoti. 


The locative singular vibhatti “smith” which is applied after 
the noun word brahma, changes into “ni”. 


66799 


[See the applied function “ni” shown underlined] 
* brahmani-in Brahma. /s. 


Tuggahanena abrahmato’pi smirh-vacanassa ni hoti. 


By means of the nipata “tu” in Sutta, the vibhatti “smith” 
applied after other nouns rather than “brahma” can also be 
changed into “ni”. [See the applied function “ni” shown underlined 
in the examples.] 

* kammani-in kamma. * cammani-in skin. ० muddhani-in the 
head. ls. 


306 


Nama Kappa 


१९८, १२३. उत्तं सनासु 

198, 123. Uttam sa,na,su. [Uttarh+sa, nā, su. 2 words] 

[V] Tassa brahmasaddassa anto utta' mapajjate 
sa,nà-icce tesu. 


The last component vowel “a” of “brahma” changes into 


“u” when “sa, na” vibhattis are applied after it 
[See the applied function “u” shown in bold, underlined. | 


[sa] * brahmuno-of Brahma. [na] ° brahmuna-with/ by Brahma. 


Sanasü'ti kimattham? What is the word *sanasu" for? 

To show that the example below is inapplicable as it is not 
of “sa, na" vibhatti. (It is of “si” 

* brahma-Brahma. ns. 


१९९, १५८. सत्युपितादीन मा सिस्मि सिलोपो च 
199, 158. Satthupita’dina’ma sismim silopo ca. 
[Satthupitu-adinarh+a+sismim+tsilopot+ca. 5 words] 
[V] Satthu,pitu-adina' manto atta’mapajjate sismim 
silopo ca hoti. 





When a nominative singular “si” vibhatti follows, the last 
component vowel **u" of the word Satthu (teacher) and pitu 
(father) etc, changes into “a”. Besides, the “si” vibhatti 
which is applied after it, is to be elided 

Summary: This Sutta changes “u” of satthu, pitu etc, into 
“a” and deletes applied after them. See the applied 
“a” shown underlined in the examples 


८८ ११ 


function 


e sattha-teacher. ® pita-father. ° mata-mother. 

* bhata-brother. * katta-doer. ns. 

Sismin'ti kimattham"? 

What is the word *sismim" for? 

To show that the examples below are inapplicable as they 
are not of “si” vibhatti. (They are of “catutthi, chatthi, sa"). 

* satthussa-of teacher, * pitussa, * matussa, * bhatussa, 

* kattussa-of doer. ds, gs. 


307 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


२००, १५९. अञ्गेस्वारत्तं 

200, 159. Aflifiesva'rattam. [Aüiesu-arattarn. 2 words] 

[V] Satthu,pitu-adina' manto afifiesu vacanesu 
aratta’mapajjate. 
The last component vowel “u” of noun word satthu, pitu 
etc; changes into “ara” when all the vibhattis except "si", 
are applied after them. [See the applied function *ara" shown un- 


derlined in the examples. Also note that “a” is shortened in some 
words. | 


[arn] ° satthararh-to teacher. ® pitararh-to father. 

* mataram-to mother. ० bhataram-to brother. 

* kattararh-to doer. 

[hi] ° sattharehi-with/by teachers. ® pitarehi, ° matarehi, 

* bhatarehi. * kattarehi. 

AññesvT ti kimattharh? 

What is the word “Aññesu” for? 

To show that the examples below are inapplicable as they 
are of “si” vibhatti, which is excluded by the word 
"afifiesu". 

(Note the function for those nouns of si-vibhatti case-endings are al- 
ready prescribed in Sutta No.199. Hence, excluded. See the examples 
below). 

* sattha-teacher. * pita, * mata, * bhata, * katta. ns. 


२०१, १६३. वा नंम्हि 

201, 163. Và nammhi. राग. 2 words] 

[V] Satthu,pitu-adina' manto aratta'mapajjate va nammhi 
vibhattimhi. 
The last component vowel “u” of noun word satthu, pitu 


etc., sometimes changes into "ara" when dative, genitive 


plural “narn” vibhatti follows. [See the applied function “ara” 
shown underlined in the examples.] 


e sattharanam-of teachers. ® pitaranam, ° mataranarh, 
e bhataranam. dp, gp. 


308 


Nama Kappa 


Va'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “va” for 

To show that the examples below are inapplicable as stipu- 
lated by the word “va”. 

* satthanarh-of teachers. * pitünam, * matünam, 

* bhatiinam. dp, gp. 


२०२. १६४. सत्थुनत्तञ्च 

202, 164. Satthun'attafi'ca. [Satthunarh+attaridca. 3 words] 

[V] Tassa satthusaddassa anto atta’mapajjate va narhmhi 
vibhattimhi. 


The last component vowel “u” of that noun word satthu, 

sometimes changes into *a" when dative, genitive plural 
nam" vibhattis is applied after it 

[See the applied function “a” shown underlined. This is lengthened 


as "a" due to the presence of “nam” vibhatti] (Refer to the rule of Sutta 
89). 


6८८७७११ 


e satthanarh-of teachers, ® pitanarh, ° matanam, 

e bhatanam, ° kattanam. dp, gp. 

Va'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “va” for? 

To show that the examples below are inapplicable as re- 
stricted by the word “va” 

* sattharanam, * pitaranarh, * mataranarh, 

* bhataranam, * dhitaranarh-of daughters. 

Caggahanam afifiesam’pi sangahanattham. 

The word “ca” has a purpose of taking in other nouns such 


as "dhitu-daughter" for the application of this Sutta. (example 
already shown). 


309 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


303, १६२. उ सस्मि सलोपो च 

203, 162. U sasmim salopo €a.[U-sasmim-salopo-ca. 4 words] 

[V] Satthu,pitu-icce'va'madina' mantassa uttam hoti va 
sasmim, salopo ca. 





The last component vowel “u” of the words satthu, pitu 
etc., remains unchanged when a dative and genitive singular 
"sa" is applied after them. The applied vibhatti “sa” is 
sometimes elided in such instances. 


66,199 


[The rule of Sutta is to keep “0” as “0”. See that in the first example 
"Satthu", “sa” is elided. In the second example “satthussa”, the eliding 
of “sa” is not carried out sometimes but reduplicated with another “5”. 
For the word “Satthuno”, please refer to Sutta 117 for its “no” func- 
tion. There are three forms of word possible in this *sa-vibhatti" case- 
ending. The contextual verb “diyate” implies the dative case while the 
word “pariggaho” signifies genitive of the examples. | 


e satthu, ° satthussa, * satthuno-to/of teacher. ds, gs. diyate-(it 
is) given, av. pariggaho-possession. nv. và. 

* pitu, * pitussa, * pituno-to/ of father. diyate, pariggaho va. 

* bhatu, * bhatussa, * bhatuno-to/of brother. diyate, 
pariggahova. 

Caggahanam dutiyasampindana ’ttharh. 

[dutiyasampindana'ttham-dutiya-the second function+sampindanatattharh] 

The word “ca” in the Sutta has a purpose of bringing in the 

second function of “eliding sa” to this Sutta. 


२०४, १६७. सक्कमन्धातादीनञ्च 
204, 167. Sakkamandhata'dinafi'ca. 


[Sakkamandhatu-adinam-ca. 2 words] 
[V] Sakkamandhatu-icce' va! madina' manto utta’mapajjate 
sasmim salopo ca hoti. 


The last component vowel “u” of the word sakkaman 
dhatu, (a king so-named), remains unchanged when dative or 
genitive singular “sa” vibhatti is after it. 


* sakkamandhatu-that of king Sakkamandhatu. gs. iva-like. ind. 


310 


Nàma Kappa 


assa-of that. gs. rajino-king. gs. vibhavo-wealth. ns. 
i.e. that king's wealth is like that of the universal monarch named 

*Sakkamandhatu". 
Evam 
e kattu-of doer. ® gantu-of goer. ° datu-of donor. ds, gs. 

icce'va'madi-and so on. 
Puna'rambhaggahanam kimattharh? 
Why this Sutta enjoins this redundant function of keeping 


u” as “0779. 


Niccadipana'ttham. [Nicca-as permanent function +dipana- 
showing-attham-for the purpose of.] 

The purpose of the function of keeping “0” as an “0” again, is to show 
the consistency of this pattern of the word “‘sakkamandhatu”’. 

* sakkamandhatu-of king Sakkamandhatu. 

Caggahanam dutiyasampindana’ tthath. 

The word “ca” in the Sutta also has a purpose of bringing 
the second function of eliding “sa” from Sutta 203 to this 
Sutta. 


२०५, १६०. ततो योन मो तु 
205, 160. Tato yona’mo tu. [Tato+yonarn+o+tu. 4 words] 


arn? 


[V] Tato ara'desato sabbesarh yonam okara’deso hoti. 


The vibhatti *yo" applied after nouns like satthu, pitu, 
whose component vowels have already been morphed into 
"ara", changes into “o”. 

[This Sutta changes “yo” into “0” after “ara” function has been applied. 


Aaa? 


The function is shown underlined below. Re:200, 201 for “ara” process] 
e sattharo-teachers. ® pitaro, ° mataro, ° bhataro, ® kattaro, 

० vattaro-speakers. np, vp, ap. 

Tuggahanena afifasma’pi yonam okaro hoti. 

By the word “tu” in Sutta, the vibhatti “yo” applied after 


other nouns can also change into “0”. 
[See “0” shown underlined in the examples] 


311 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


e caturo-four. jana-people. * gavo-cows. * ubho-two. purisa- 
men. np. 


२०६, १६५. ततो fer मि 


206, 165. Tato smi’mi. [Tato+smirnti. 3 words] 
[V] Tato ara'desato smirh-vacanassa i-kara’deso hoti. 


The vibhatti *smim" applied after nouns like satthu, pitu 
whose component vowels had been changed into “a 


ara", 
morphs into an “i”. [This Sutta changes “smir” into “ra” 
function is done. See the function shown in bold, underlined] 


८८५११ 


after “ara 


* satthari, * pitari, * matari, * dhitari-in daughter. * bhatari, 
e kattari, * vattari-in speaker. Is. 
Puna tatogahanena afifasma’ pi smimvacanassa ikaro hoti. 


By using the word “tato” again in Sutta, the vibhatti 
“smir” applied after other nouns can also change into 
[See the example. “i” is shown in bold, underlined] 

* bhuvi-in the earth. /s. 


८८५११ 


२०७, FRR. M AT 
207, 161. Na a. [Nat+a. 2 words] 


[V] Tato ara'desato navacanassa a-adeso hoti. 


The vibhatti “na” applied after nouns like satthu, pitu 
whose component vowels have become" ara", changes into 


८८८११ or 


[This Sutta changes “na” into “a” after “ara” function is done. See 
the applied function “a” shown in bold, underlined in the examples] 


e satthara-with/by teacher. ® pitara, ° matara, ° bhatara, 
e dhitara, ° kattara, ° vattara. is. 


312 


Nama Kappa 


२०७, १६६. आरो TH मिकारे 
208, 166. Aro rassa’mikare. [Aro+rassarh+ikare. 3 words] 
[V] Ara’deso rassa’mapajjate ikare pare. 


The vowel “a” of “āra” has to be shortened into “a” when 


followed by an “i” which is a morpheme of vibhatti 
“smith”. 

(Refer to Sutta No. 206 for “i” function. The shortened “a” is shown 
underlined). 


e satthari-in teacher. ® pitari, ° matari, * dhitari, 
e kattari-in doer. * vattari-in speaker. Is. 


२०९, १६८. पितादीन मसिम्हि 
209, 168. Pita’ dina? masimhi. [Pitu-ādīnam+asimhi. 2 words] 
[V] Pita'dina'maradeso rassa’mapajjate asimhi vibhattimhi. 


The vowel “a” of *ara-function", applied in the words pitu 
etc., have to be similarly shortened into “a” in all cases 
(vibhatti) except “si”. (Also smith, is to be excluded as the function 
of rassa had been done as per Sutta No. 208. The Shortened “a” is 
shown underlined) 


Note: This procedure is applicable only for all yo, arh, na, 
hi, nam, sma, su vibhattis applied after pitu, matu (mother), 
bhatu (brother), dhitu (daughter). 


e pitara-with/ by father. ° matara, * bhatara, ° dhitara. (These 

examples are in nà vibhatti case-ending) 
* pitaro-fathers. ० mataro, * bhataro, * dhitaro. (These examples 

are in yo vibhatti case-ending) 

Asimhiggahanam tomhi pare ikara'desafiapana'ttham. 

The word “asimhi” in Sutta, has a purpose of changing the 

last component vowel of other nouns affixed with a “to” 

suffix into an “1”. [asimhi=a (derived from *na")-not-'si-vibhatti “si™+ 

mhi-derived from smith, which means “due to, when". See an “i” be- 

fore “to-affix” on the examples shown in bold, underlined. “to” is an 

indeclinable affix. See Sutta No. 248. It is not a Vibhatti per se.] 


313 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


e matito-from mother. ® pitito-from father. 
* bhatito-from brother. * duhitito-from daughter. 


२१०, २३९. तयातयीनं तकारो त्वत्तं वा 
210, 239. Taya,tayinam takaro tvattam va. 
[Taya, taymam-takaro-*tvattam-va. 4 words] 
[V] Taya,tayi-icce'tesam takaro tvatta' mapajjate va. 
The “ta” of “taya, tayi" morphemes (See Suttas 139, 145), 
sometimes changes into “tva”. 
[See the applied function “tva” shown underlined in the examples.] 
* tvaya, * taya-with/by you. is. 
e tvayi, * tayi-in you. ls. 
Etesa' miti kimattham? 
What is the word *etesam" for? 
To show that examples below are inapplicable as the word 
"etesu" refers only to “taya & tayi". 
* tuvam. * tavarh-to you. as. 


Iti namakappe tatiyo kando. 
The Third Section of Noun ends. 


314 


Nama Kappa 


Catuttha Kanda 
The Fourth Section 


२११, १२६. अत्तन्तो हिस्मि मनत्तं 

211, 126. Atta’nto hismi’manattam. 
[Atta-anto--hismimr--anattam. 3 words] 

[V] Tassa attano anto anatta’mapajjate himhi vibhattimhi. 


The last component vowel of that noun word “atta (self)" 


when followed by the Vibhatti “hi”, changes into “ana”. 
[This Sutta changes the last “a” of “atta” into “ana”. The applied func- 
tion “an” is shown underlined. “e” is the function applied by Sutta 101. 


* attanehi, * attanebhi-with/by/from oneself, ourselves. ip. abp. 


Attanto’ti kimattham"? 

What is the word “attanto” for? 

To show that examples below are inapplicable as they are 
not the word “atta”. 

* rajehi, * rajebhi-with/ by/ from kings. ip. abp. 

Hismin'ti kimattham? [hismim-iti] 

What is the word *hismim" for? 

To show that example below is inapplicable as it is not of 
“hi”, but of “sa”. (See the function of the example in Sutta 213) 

* attano-of oneself. ds, gs. 


Anatta'miti bhavaniddesena attasaddassa saka’deso hoti 
sabbasu vibhattisu. 


By using the word “anatta” in a Bhava taddhita expression 
as *anattam" (See Sutta), the word “atta (self)" changes into 
another word-form “saka-one’s own" in all vibhattis. [See 
“saka” shown underlined below. | 

e sako-oneself, one’s own, ns. ० Saka, np. ° sakarn, as. * sake. ap. 
Note: The ending vowels “0” “a” etc. in the examples are Vibhatti- 
derivative morphemes of the relevant vibhattis. 


315 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


२१२, १२९. ततोस्मिनि 
212, 329. Tato smir ni. [Tato+smirn+ni. 3 words] 
[V] Tato attato smimvacanassa ni hoti. 


The vibhatti *smim" applied after that noun word "atta", 
changes into “ni”. [See “ni” shown underlined in the example.] 


* attani-in onself. Is. 


२१३, १२७. सस्स नो 
2 13, 127. Sassa no. [Sassa+no. 2 words] 
[V] Tato attato sassa vibhattissa no hoti. 


The vibhatti “sa” applied after “atta”, changes into “no”. 
[See “no” shown underlined in the example. | 


e attano-of oneself. ds, gs. 


२१४, १२८.स्माना 
214, 128. Sma na. [Sma+na. 2 words] 
[V] Tato attato sma-vacanassa na hoti. 
The vibhatti “sma” applied after that noun word “atta”, 


ben A’? 


changes into “nā”. [See “na” shown underlined in the example.] 
* attana-from oneself. abs. 


Note: Sometimes, this type of word may be in instrumental singular 
case "na" [attat+na]. In this case, no specific function is required as the 
word itself is complete to convey the necessary meaning "by oneself, or 
by itself". It is a reflexive pronoun in case of the second meaning. 


Puna tatogahanena tassa attano takarasse'va rakaro hoti 
sabbesu vacanesu. 


By using the word “tato” again in the Vutti of Sutta, the last 
component word “ta” of “atta” changes into “ra” in all 
vibhatti cases. (i.e. last “t” of “tta” becomes “r”. See it below shown 
underlined) 

* atrajo-son born of oneself, one's own child, ns. 


* atrajarh-to son born of oneself, to one's own child. as. 


316 


Nama Kappa 


२१५, १४१. झलतो च 
215, 141. Jhalato ca. [Jhalato+ca. 2 words] 
[V] Jha,la-icce'tehi smavacanassa na hoti. 


The vibhatti “sma” applied after “i, 1, u, ü-ending, jha, la- 
termed nouns of masculine gender, changes into “na”. 


a? 


[This Sutta changes “sma” applied after i, 1, u, ü-ending, jha, la-termed 
nouns of masculine gender into “na”. See “na” shown underlined] 


[jha-termed, i-ending noun] * agginà-from fire. 

[jha-termed, 1-ending noun] ° dandinà-from the one who has a stick. 
[la-termed, u-ending noun] ° bhikkhuna-from monk. 

[la-termed, ü-ending noun] ° sayambhunaà-from self-enlightened 
Buddha. All examples abs. 

Sma'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “sma” for? 

To show that examples below are inapplicable as they are 
not of “sma”. (They are of *yo") 

* aggayo, * munayo, * isayo. np, ap. [The meaning shown be- 
fore] 


२१६, १८०. घपतोस्मियंवा 
216, 180. Gha,pato smim yam va. 
[Gha, pato*smim-yam-va. 4 words] 
[V] Tasma gha,pato smimvacanassa yam hoti va. 


The vibhatti *smim" applied after gha, pa-named, “A, i, 1, 
u, ü-ending nouns of feminine gender sometimes changes 
into “yarn”. [“smirh” becomes “yarh”. See it shown underlined] 


[gha-termed, 4-ending noun] ® kafifiayam, * kafifiaya-in girl. 
[pa-termed, i-ending noun] * rattiyam, * rattiya- in night. 
[pa-termed, i-ending noun] ° itthiyarh, * itthiya- in woman. 
[pa-termed, u-ending noun] * yaguyam, * yaguya- in rice-porridge. 
[pa-termed, ü-ending noun] ® vadhuyam, * vadhuya-in daughter-in- 
law. Is. 

Note: All examples are of feminine gender. The second example in 
each pair is inapplicable. 


317 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


२१७, १९९. योनं नि नपुंसकेहि 

217, 199. Yonam ni napumsakehi. 
[Yonarh+ni+napumsakehi. 3 words] 

[V] Sabbesam yonam ni hoti và napumsakehi lingehi. 


The vibhatti *yo" applied after all neuter gender nouns 


changes into "ni" sometimes. 

[This Sutta changes “yo” applied only after i, 1, u, ü-ending neuter- 
gender nouns into “ni”. See “ni” in the first example of each pair shown 
by being underlined. The second is inapplicable example.] 


[i-ending noun] * atthini, * atthi-bones. 

[la-termed, u-ending noun] ® ayüni, * àyü-age, life. np, ap. 
Napumsakehi’ti kimattham? 

What is the word “napurmsakehi” for? To show that exam- 
ple below is inapplicable as it is not a “napurhsaka-neuter 
gender word". (It is of feminine gender) 

* itthiyo-women. np, ap. 

Note: The next Sutta also changes “yo” applied after a-ending neuter 


८८, 122 


gender nouns into “ni”. 


२१८, १९६. अतो निच्चं 
218, 196. Ato niccam. [Atotniccar. 2 words] 
[V] Akarantehi napumsakalingehi yonam ni hoti niccam. 


The vibhatti *yo" applied after neuter gender nouns ending 
n “a”, always changes into "ni". 

[^ni" is shown underlined. In each pair of examples, the first is nomina- 
tive, vocative plural and the second is accusative plural though both 
may look the same in the physical structure.] 


° yàni. ° yani-which. 

* tani. * tani-those. 

* kani. * kani- which/ what. 

* bhayani. * bhayani-dangers. 

e rupani. * rüpani-forms/ physical matters. np, ap. 


318 


Nàma Kappa 


२१९, १९५. सिं 
2 19, 195. Sr i. [Si*arn. 2 words] 
[V] Akara'ntehi napumsakalingehi sivacanassa am hoti niccam. 


The vibhatti “si” applied after a-ending neuter gender 
nouns, always changes into “ar”. [The applied function “arh” is 
shown underlined.] 


e sabbam-all. * yarh-which. ® tarh-that. ® karh-what. 
e rüpam-form. ns. 


२२०, ७४. सेसतो लोपं गसिपि 
220, 74. Sesato lopam gasi’pi. 


[Sesatolopam-gasi-api. 4 words] 
[V] Tato nidditthehi lingehi sesato ga si-icce’te 
lopa’mapajjante. 


The pathama (nominative) and ga-named vocative singular 
vibhatti “si”, are to be elided. 


666,899 


Note: The first example is vocative "si", the second one is an ordinary 
nominative "si". Both "si" are elided by this Sutta. 

Bhoti is a vocative particle to be used before feminine gender nouns. 
Bho is used in front of masculine gender nouns. 


bhoti ® itthi!-Oh woman! vs. sā ° itth1-that woman. ns. 

bho * dandi!-Oh stick-holding person! vs. 

so * dandi-that person having stick. ns. 

bho * sattha!-Oh teacher! vs. so ® sattha-that teacher. ns. 

bho * ràja!-Oh king! vs. so * raja-that king. ns. 

Sesato'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “‘sesato” for? 

To show that the example below is inapplicable as it is of 
“pathma si", not ga-termed “si”. (So, that “si” is not elided. 
Instead, it changed into “0” by Sutta No. 104) 

* puriso-man. ns. gacchati-goes. av. 

Gast ti kimattham? 

What is the word “gasi” for? To show that the examples be- 


319 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


low are inapplicable as they are not “ga-termed si”, but “sa- 

vibhatti". 

* itthiya-of woman, * satthussa-of teacher. ds, gs. 

Note: 

(1) The nominative "si" applied after a-ending nouns in masculine 
gender usually changes into “0” (see Sutta 104). 

(2) "si" applied after a-ending nouns in neuter gender usually changes 
into *am" (See Sutta 219). 

(3) “si” applied after the word “Satthu-teacher, raja etc,” changes into 
an “a” (Refer to Sutta 199, 189). 

The function of this Sutta is applicable only for nominative and voca- 

tive “si” vibhattis applied after some i, I, प, पं, ending nouns. It is inap- 

plicable for nouns which are applicable by the function of Suttas 104, 

113, 114, 124, 125, 126, 152, 189, 193 and 219. In view of this proce- 

dure, it should be noted that both nominative, vocative singular 

vibhatti "si" is usually invisible in majority of nouns of all genders 

and declensions though traces of vibhatti-forms of other 13 vibhatti- 

applied nouns are still visible even after various kinds of morphological 

procedures have been applied. 


Traces of vibhatti-forms 
Shown below are traces of various Vibhattis (case-endings) except for 
nouns in “si” Vibhatti. Traces of unchanged vibhatti-forms are shown in 
bold. 


Kafifiayo (Nominative plural *yo") 
Purisam (Accusative singular “ar” 
Munayo (Accusative plural *yo") 
Kammuna (Instrumental singular na") 
Purisehi (Instrumental plural **hi") 
purisassa (Dative & Genitive singular “sa’’) 
Purisanam (Dative & Genitive plural “nam” 
Purisasma (Ablative singular “sma” 
Purisehi (Ablative plural *hi") 

Purisasmirh (Locative singular *smim") 
Purisesu (Locative plural “su” 


320 


Nàma Kappa 


२२१, २८२. सब्बास मावुसोपसग्गनिपातादीहि च 
221, 282. Sabbasa’mavuso’pasagga,nipata’dihi ca. 
[Sabbasarh+4vuso, upasagga, nipata-adthitca. 3 words] 
[V] Sabbasarh vibhattinam ekavacana,bahuvacananam 
pathama, dutiya,tatiya,catutth1,pafiicami,chatthi,sattamtnam 
lopo hoti avuso,upasagga,nipata-icce’va madihi ca. 


All (the singular and plural of *pathama, dutiya, tatiya, ca- 
tutthi, paficami, chatthi, sattamr") vibhattis, applied after 
upasagga and nipata words, including the vocative particle 
*avuso", are to be elided. 

Summary: This Sutta enjoins to delete any vibhatti (case- 
endings) applied after upasagga and nipata particles includ- 
ing the vocative particle *avuso-my friend". 


Q: Why vibhattis (case-ending of nouns) applied after upasagga and 
nipata particles have to be elided? 

A: Because it is not necessary to apply any morphological function of 
structural and physical change to them. 

Q: If to be elided, why then the vibhattis are applied after them? 

A: It is applied as a rule of the grammatical necessity. A complete word 

in a meaningful sentence has to end in a certain vibhatti so that it can 

convey and signify its meaning according to the relevant vibhatti being 

applied even though it might had been either elided or changed into 

other newly-morphed forms. 

Q: Do all upasagga and nipdata particles require to be applied with 
Vibhattis? 

A: Only those certain upasagga and nipata words (which are used in- 

dependently in a sentence as an individual word) are necessary to be 

applied with a Vibhatti. However, most of upasagga words used as pre- 

fixes of the verbs and verbal nouns are not required to be applied with 

Vibhattis. 

Q: What kind of Vibhattis are generally applied then? 

A: Most are found to be applied with a nominative singular or plural. In 

cases of vocative words, vocative is applied. Some scholars state that 

nominative is usually applied after independent upasagga words and all 

seven vibhattis can be applied after independent nipata words. Howev- 

er, it should be noted that any relevant vibhatti can be applied after 

them depending on the contextual position and the role each word 

plays such as adjective, adverb or disjunctive and so forth. 














321 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


Examples cited in Sutta 
Tvar ® pana’vuso, (tvarh-you, ° pana’vuso=pana+avuso, pana-no 
meaning, avuso-my friend? i.e. how about you, my friend? Singular) 
tumhe pana’ vuso, (tumhe ° pana’vuso=panatavuso, i.e. How about 
you? in plural sense here) 
e padaso dhammarh vaceyya, (He) should teach and say Dhamma 
word by word, i.e. in detail. padaso-by word, is. dhammarh-the 
dhamma, as. vaceyya-(one) should cause to say students, av. i.e. teach. 
(a causative verb) 
viharam * sve upagaccheyya. 
viharam-to the temple, as. sve-tomorrow, nip. upagaccheyya-(one) 
should approach. av. i.e. (He) should come to the temple tomorrow. 
(Pana, avuso, and sve are nipatas. The rest are non-nipata words. Both 
numbers of “si” and “yo” in vocative case can be applied to avuso and 
must be elided. The word avuso means “my friend", a peer-language 
used to address among equals of both monks and lay people alike. The 
nipdta “pana” has no meaning here though it has some distinctive 
meanings occasionally based on context of where it is positioned in a 
sentence. Padaso is a nà-vibhatti-ending word with indeclinable affix 
“so”. Sve is a plain nipáta without an affix in the locative sense) 


20 Upasagga Words 
(Important to be memorized by serious students) 
० Pa, * para, * ni, ° ni, * u, * du, * sam, vi, ava, anu, pari, adhi, 
abhi, pati, su, à, ati, api, apa, upa. (These are called 20 upasagga 
words, with no vibhatti. However, upasagga words can affect various 
meanings and usages when they are prefixed to the roots of verbs. 


Upasagga particles prefixed in front of Roots 

Below is only a sample of upasagga words prefixed to the roots “hara-to 
carry and bhü-to be" shown in the Sutta, thus forming various Kita-nouns. 
The upasagga (prefix) words are shown underlined. 

० paharo, * parabhavo, * niharo, * ntharo, * uharo, * duharo, 
e samharo, ® viharo, ° avaharo, * anuharo, ° pariharo, * adhiharo, 
० abhiharo, * patiharo, * suharo, * aharo, * atiharo, * apiharo, 
e apaharo, * upaharo, [These will be translated later. all ns.] evam 
visati upasaggehi ca. Thus, (vibhatti are applied) after twenty 
upasagga words. [This is only a generalized statement. Except after some 


322 


Nàma Kappa 


independently used upasagga words, the other upasagga words used as pre- 
fix such as these, do not require to have any vibhatti case-endings] 


Note: Vibhattis are not elided in these examples shown above as they have 
become nouns. That is why there is an “o-ending” in these words. See each 
Upasagga is prefixed to the front of the root “hara or bhū” and becomes a 
complete word “paharo” etc, after going through necessary morphological 


procedures. Note that the only example where the root “bhū” contains is 
“parabhavo”. The rest are made up of one single root “hara”. 


The Use of upasagga Particles 

The meaning of each upasagga words in examples will be explained in some 
detail so that the students will be able to figure out some possible meaning of 
upasagga words they may encounter and develop some basic knowledge of 
them. 

Usage: upasagga words are generally used as prefixes placed before the roots 
of Akhyata verbs and Kita-affixed Kita-nouns. There are quite a few 
upasagga words which can be independently used. nipata words are used 
in various places of sentences and words. When an upasagga word or a 
nipüta word is used as an independent word in a sentence, some certain 
vibhattis, especially nominative, can be applied. After application, the 
vibhattis are to be elided by this Sutta as a general rule of the grammar. 





Three kinds of upasagga particles 

There are three kinds of upasaggas. They are: 

(1) Those that follow the meaning of the root, without affecting 
its original meaning. This kind of upasagga is called 
“Dhatva’ttha’nuvattaka”. 
[Dhatu-root+attha-meaning+anu-following+vattaka-that which 
happens] 

(2) Those that absolutely mean opposite of the root. These cate- 
gorically change the original meaning of the root. This is 
called ‘“Dhatva’tthabadhaka”. [Dhatut+attha+badhaka-that 
which debars, is opposite of the meaning of the root.] 

(3) Those that enhance the original meaning of the root by add- 
ing more specific meaning and flavor to it. This kind of 
upasagga is called *Dhatva'tthavisesaka". 
[Dhatu+attha+visesaka-modifier or enhancer] 


323 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


Detailed Meanings of upasagga Particles 
Note: Sometimes, certain upasagga words shown by the 9 mark can also be 
used independently in sentences in addition to being used as prefixes. 


* Pa 

(a) specifically, specially, in various ways, 
e.g. Pajanati-(He) knows specifically, in various ways. 
[Pa+janati] 
Pafifia- knowing specifically, in various ways, i.e. wisdom, 
knowledge. [Pa+fa] 

(b) up, 
e.g. Pagganhati-(He) takes up, lifts up by praise and support 
etc. [Pa*ganhati] 
Paggaho-such an act. [Pa*gaho] 

(c) away, abroad, far away, 
e.g. Pakkamati-(He) goes away. [Pa+kamati] 
Pakkanto-gone away. [Pa-*kanto] 
Pavasarh-living abroad, the distant place. [Pa+vasarh] 
Pavasi-resident abroad, one who lives at a distant region or 
country. [Pa+vasi] 

(d) the source, 
e.g. Pabhavati-(It) originates. i.e. it starts to happen. 
[Pa+bhavati] 
Pabhavo-origin. [Pat+bhavo] 

(e) successively, 
e.g. Papitamaho-great-grandfather. [Pa*pitamaho] 
Panatta-great-grandchildren. [Pa+natta] 
Pacariya-successive generation of preceding teachers. 
[Pa+acariya] 

(f) chief, noble, 
e.g. Padhanam-chief, principal. [Pat+dhanarh] 
Pavacanarh-the noble words of Buddha, i.e. canonical texts. 
[Pat+vacanam, “a” is lengthened] 
Panitam-noble, the best. [Patnitarh. n changed into n] 

(g) being clear and clean, 


324 


Nàma Kappa 


e.g. Pasidati-(It) settles clear (as the mind being clear with 
joy and faith). [Pa-sidati] 
Pasanno-being joyous or pleased with joy etc. [Patsanno] 
(h) inside, 
Pakkhipati-(He) puts inside. [Pa--khipati] 
Pakkhitto-having put inside. [Pa--khitto] 
Pasassati-(He) breathes in. [Patsassati] 
Passaso-inhalation [Pa+ssaso]. 
(i) intensifier, 
Padahati-(he) firmly exerts effort. [Pa+dahati] 
Padhanarh-Effort in meditation practice or in any pursuit 
[Pa*dhànam] 
Pavassati-(It) rains heavily. [patvassati] 
Pavanam-thick forest. [patvanarh] 





* para 
(a) opposite of, 
e.g. Parajayati-(He) fails or is defeated. [Para+jayati] 
Parajayo-defeat, failure. [Para+jayo] Compare with>Jayati- 
conquers. 
Parabhavati-(He) loses. [Para+bhavati] 
Parabhavo-loss, ruin. [Para+bhavo] compare with>Bhavati- 
happens, arises. 
(b) again and again, continuously, 
e.g. Parakkamati-(He) makes effort again and again 
[Para+kamati] 
Parakkamo-continuous, successive effort [Parat+kamo]. 
(c) wrongly, 
e.g. Paramasati-(He) touches it wrongly, takes it in wrong 
way. [Para+amasati]. 
Paramaso-touching wrongly, wrong view. [Para+amaso] 


* ni 
(a) out, away, 
e.g. Nikkhamati-(He) comes out. [Nit+kamati] 


325 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


Niggato-gone out, left. [Nit+gato] 
(b) down, into, 
e.g. Nidahati-(He) keeps underneath, stores (as of precious 
things by burying) or takes it deeply. [Ni+dahati] 
Nidhanarh-such an act. [Ni*dhànam] 
Nihito-having kept down. [Nithito] 
Nikkhipati-(He) drops down. [Ni+khipati] 
Nikkhitto-having dropped. [Nitkhitto] 
Nisidati-(He) settles down. i.e. sits. [Ni*sidati] 
Nisinno- having sat. [Ni*sinno] 
Nigganhati-(he) takes down, i.e. censures. [Ni*ganhati] 
Compare» Pagganhati-lifts up by praise etc. [Pa+ganhati] 
Niggaha-censure. [Ni+gaha] 
Compare» Paggaha-encouragement and support [Pa+gaha] 
(c) back down, as in going or in an action, opposite of, 
e.g. Nivattati-backs down or gives up [Ni--vattati] 
Nivattanam-returning or act of giving up. 
(d) without, lack of, 
e.g. Nidukkho-without suffering. [Nit+dukkho] 
Nirogo-without disease, healthy. [Ni+rogo] 
Nillajjo-without shame, shameless. [Nitlajjo] 











* ni 
out, off, to remove, 
e.g. Niharati-(He) takes out, removes. [Ni+harati] 
Niharanam-act of taking out, removal. [Nr-haranam] 
Note: Both Ni and Ni are not different from each other ex- 
cept the fact that one is a lengthened-form of upasagga. 


326 


Nama Kappa 


*u 
(a) up, upward 

e.g. Uggacchati-(It) goes upward. [U+gacchati] 
Uggamanam-act of going up. [U+gamanarm] 
Unnamati-(It) leans up (as a young shoot of tree or like a 
person being arrogant). [U--namati] 

Unnamanam-act of leaning up, arrogance, pride. 
[U+namanarh | 

Ugganhati-takes upward, i.e. learns. [U+ganhati] 
(b) wrong, opposite of, 

e.g. Ummaggo-the wrong path [U--maggo] 
Uddhammarh-wrong Dhamma [U--dhammam] 
Ubbinayam-wrong Vinaya (discipline) [U+vinayarh] 

(c) intensifier. 
yyufijanti-to make intensive effort. [U--yufijanti] 
Ubbadhati-(It) stresses out intensely, exhausts [U+badhati] 


Ubbadhanam-such a condition [U+badhanarh] 





ISIS 





° du 

(a) bad, unwholesome, poor in nature, 
e.g. Duccarati-(He) acts badly or unethically. [Du+carati] 
Dukkatam-bad deed. [Du+katarh] 
Duggati-bad rebirth, bad destiny. [Du+gati] 

(b) ill, inauspicious, 
Dumangalam-inauspiciousness. [Du*mangalam] Dunni- 
mittam-bad omen. [Du+nimittarh] 

(c) without, lack of, 
e.g. Dubbhikkham-without food, famine. [Du+Bhikharh] 
Dussilo-without morality. [Du+silo] 
Duppafifio-without wisdom, ignorant. [Du-*pafifio] 
Dusassam-lack of paddy, having poor crops of rice due to 
draught or pests etc. [Du*sassam] 

(d) being difficult of, 
e.g. Dukkaram-hard to do. [Du*karam] 
Dullabharh-hard to get. [Du+labharh] 


327 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 
Dujjanam-hard to know. [Du+janarh] 


* sam 
(a) together, in union, 
e.g. Samvasati-(He) lives together. [Sam-vasati] 
Samvaso-act of being together, co-habitation. [Sarh+vaso] 
Samyujjati-(It) joins together. [Sam-yujjati] 
Samyogo-act of joining together. [Sarh+yogo] 
(b) well, unitedly, 
e.g. Sangayati-(He) sings or chants together. [Sarh+gayati] 
Saügiti-act of singing together. [Sam-giti] 
Sankharoti-(It) acts together. [Sam karoti] 
Saükharo-such an act or state, i.e. conditioned things. 
[Sarh+karo] 
Sangahnati-(He) takes well, such as by means of praise, 
support etc. [Sarh+ganhati] 
Sangaho-such an act. [Sarh+gaho] 
Note: “th” becomes “ù” as it precedes “kh” or “g” in the words above. 
(c) self, oneself, 
e.g. Sambhujjhati-(He) knows by himself (without any out- 
side help). [Sam-bhujjhati] 
Sambuddho-the one who knows by himself, i.e. a Buddha. 
[Sam+bhuddho] 
Note: “th” becomes “m” as it precedes “bh” here. 
Sanditthiko-seen by oneself. [Sarn+ditthiko] 
Note: “th” becomes “n” as it precedes “d” here. 
(d) again and again, 
e.g. Sandhavati-(It) runs again and again (from one life to 
another etc). [Sarh+dhavati] 
Note: “th” becomes “n” as it precedes “dh” here. 
Sarhsarati-(It) happens again and again [Sarntsarati]. 
(e) intense, intensifier, 
e.g. Saratto-attached with strong lust or attachment. 


[Sam-ratto] Note: “sarn” becomes “sa” here. 


328 


Nama Kappa 


e vi 
(a) specially, 
e.g. Vipassati-(He) sees specially. [Vitpassati] 
Vipassana-act of seeing in a special way. i.e. insight medi- 
tation. [Vipassana] 
(b) transformed, 
e.g. Vikaroti-(He) makes so that it becomes something else. 
[Vi*karoti] 
Vikati-such an act, a non-natural state. [Vi+kati]. 
Compare >Pakati-natural<vikati-non-natural. 
Vimukho-face being changed, the changed face due to un- 
happiness or anger etc.[Vitmukho] 
Vipatisaro-thinking with guilt, regret. [Vi+patisaro] 
(c) variously, in different ways, 
e.g. Vimati-various thought, different view, doubt. 
[Vitmati] 
(d) opposite of, against, 
e.g. Vivadati-(He) speaks against, disputes or quarrels. 
[ Vit+vadati] 
Vivado-dispute, bickering, conflicting talk. [Vi+vado] 
Vya’sanarh-ruin, loss. [Vitasanarm] 
(e) without, out, 
e.g. Virajjati-(He) does not crave, detaches. [Vitrajjati] 
Virago-such an act, detachment. [Vi+rago] 
(f) being off, separated, being apart, 
e.g. Viyujjati-(It) does not join, disjoins. [Vityujjati] 
Viyogo-such an act. [Vityogo] 
Vippayutto-disjoined. [Vitpatyutto] 
Vigacchati-(It) goes off, disappears. [Vit+gacchati] 
Vigamo-such an act. [Vi*gamo] 


329 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


* ava 

(a) down, inside, 
e.g. Avagacchati-(It) goes down. [Ava+gacchati] 
Avagamanam-such an act. [Avat+gamanarm] 


Oggacchati, Oggamanarh (Same meaning as in previous examples, 
except that “ava” changes into **o") 


Avaganhati>Ogganhati-(It) submerges, goes down into wa- 
ter etc. or looks into the problem, ponders upon (figurative- 
ly used). [Avat+ganhati] 
Avagaho-such an act. [Avat+gaho] 
Osarati> (He) goes down into water etc. [avatsarati] 

(b) contemptuously, mean, 
e.g. Avajanati-(He) knows contemptuously, looks down. 
[Avatjanati] 
Avamano-such an act, disdain. [Avat+mano] 
Avaharati-(He) takes it in a mean manner, i.e. steals 
[Avatharati]. 
Avaharo-such an act, stealing. [Avatharo] 
Note: “Ava” and “O” are two interchangeable upasagga words. 


9 anu 
(a) at every frequency of time, occurring at certain times, re- 
peatedly (followed by descriptive word of time such as 
masa-month, addhamasa-half month, dina-day or samvacchara- 
year etc.) 
e.g. Anumasarh-every month [Anu+masam] 
Anvaddhamasam-every half month [Anu+addhamasarh] 
Anudinam-every day [Anu-dinam] 
Anusamvaccharam-every year [Anu+samvaccharam]. 
(b) following, after, 
e.g. Anugacchati-(He) goes following, accompanies. 
[Anu+gacchati] 
Anve'ti [Anu+eti] (same meaning). 
Anugati-such an act. [Anu+gati] 


330 


Nàma Kappa 


Anujanati-(He) knows accordingly as requested, i.e. permits 
[Anu+janati]. 
Anufha-permission. [Anu+fa] 
Anunnato-allowed, permitted. [Anu+nato] 
Anukülam-suitable, appropriate, following the course of a 
person's action [Anu+kilam]. 
(c) again and again, repeatedly, 
e.g. Anuyufijati-(He) engages again and again. 
i.e. makes repeated effort, interrogates. [Anu+yurijati]. 
Anuyogo-such an act, questioning repeatedly, sustained 
effort [Anutyogo]. 
Anussarati-(He) remembers repeatedly [Anu+sarati]. 
Anussati-such an act [Anu-sati]. 
Anumodati-(He) rejoices repeatedly. 
Anumodanam, Anumodo-such an act [Anu+modati]. 
Anusamvanneti-explains again and again, re-explains 
[Anu+sam-+vanneti]. 
Anusamvannana-re-explanation, sub-commentary. 
[Anu-*sam-vannana]. 
(d) behind, 
e.g. Anuratham-behind chariot or vehicle [Anu+ratharh]. 
(e) alongside, in imitation of, 
e.g. soto nadim anusandati-the current flows along the river 
[anut+sandati]. 
Bhagavantam anupavajjimsu-(Y oung Sakyan princes too) 
ordained in imitating the Buddha [anu+pavajjimsu]. 
Sisso acariyam anugacchati ca anuvattati ca. The pupil fol- 
lows teacher and imitates too. [anu+gacchati] [anu+vattati]. 
(f) inferior or lower in rank, sub-standard, 
e.g. Anuthera-those below senior monks, i.e. less-senior 
monks [Anu+thera]. 
Anunayaka-those below senior leaders, i.e. less-senior lead- 
ers [Anu+nayaka]. 
(g) in compliance with, suitable, being appropriate, favorable, 
agreeable, according to, 














331 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


e.g. Anurüpam-suitable, appropriate [Anu+riparh], com- 
pare»Patirüpam-* suitable [Pati--rüpam]. 
Anukülam-suitable, agreeable. following [Anu+ktlarh-the 
bank of a river etc. a figurative expression. ]. 
Compare» Patikülam-disagreeable, unlikable [Pati--külarn. 
This is also a figurative expression]. 
Anulomarh-in sequential order. [Anu-following*lomam-the 
hair, a figurative expression.], Compare» Patilomam-in reverse 
order, [Pati-against+lomam. This is also a figurative expression] 
Anurujjhati-(he) favors, likes [Anu-rujjhati]. 
Anurodho-favour, agreement [Anu+rodho]. 
Compare> Virodho-disfavor, dislike. 

(h) small, in detail, 
Anubyafijanam-small bodily marks or parts and figure. 
[Anu+byafjanam]. 
Anusamvanneti-explains in detail. [Anu+sarh+vanneti] 











° pari 

(a) from all around, round and round, being surrounded, 
e.g. Parikkharitva-having surrounded. [Paritkaritva] 
parikkharo-accessory, personal effects. [Pari+karo] 
Paribhasati-(He) says condescendingly (as in giving instruc- 
tions or yelling abusive language) [Pari--bhasati]. 
Paribhasa-such an act as a directive or a revilement. 
[Parit+bhasa] 
Paricchedati-(He) cuts from all around, sets the limits. 
Paricchedo-such an act, limitation, section, chapter. 
[pari*chedati] 
Parikha-moat, dug around the palace premises in ancient 
times. [pari--kha] 

(b) overall, 
e.g. Parijanati-(He) knows overall. [Parit+janati] 
Parifiria-overall knowledge. [Pari+fa] 

(c) being dominant, 


332 


Nàma Kappa 


e.g. Paribhavati-(He) is from all around, dominates, bullies. 
[Parit+bhavati] 
Paribhavo-such an act. [Parit+bhavo] 


9 adhi 
(a) up, above, over, 
e.g. adhivaseti-(He) lets it on him, i.e. accepts or enjoys 
without resisting. [adhi--vaseti] 
Adhivasana-such an act, acceptance of a request or desire 
etc. [Adhi+vasana]. 
adhitthati-(It) firmly stands, i.e. firmly resolves in mind. 
[adhi+thati]. 
adhitthanam-firm mental resolve, strong decision. 
(b) specially, superior, supreme, 
e.g. Adhisilam-superior Sila. [Adhi+silarh] 
Adhiraja-the supreme king. [Adhi-raja] 
Adhidevata-the supreme deity. [Adhi+devata] 

(c) being dominant of, the lord over (usually followed by a noun 
in locative case when it means being “the lord over" as an 
independently used word), 

E.g. Adhi devesu Buddho. The Buddha is supreme lord of 
deities. 

As a prefix to a verb: e.g. Adhigahnati-(It) takes up all, i.e. 
exceeds [Adhi+gahnati]. 

Adhipati-lord [Adhi+pati]. 

Ajjhavasati-(He) lives as a lord or being dominant, reigns. 
(as a king or chief authority of a location). [Adhi+a+vasati]. 
Ajjhavaso-such an act [Adhi+ā+vāso]. 

(d) attain, reach, 

e.g. adhigacchati-realizes, knows, attains. [Adhi+ gacchati] 
adhigamo-such an act [Adhi+gamo]. 

(e) deeply, 

e.g. adhimuccati-(One) keeps in depth (such as tendencies, 
thoughts etc.) [adhit+muccati]. 





333 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


adhimutti-such a mental condition, inner tendency or pref- 
erences. [adhi--mutti]. 

(f) excessively, very much, 
Adhimafifiati-(He) thinks highly. [Adhi--mafifiati] 
Adhimano-viewing oneself highly, extreme self-pride, such 
as thinking oneself that one has attained a higher state of 
spiritual progress which is not true. [Adhi+mano]. 

(g) with regard to, relating to, in connection with, 
Adhikicca-concerning, in respect of [adhitkicca]. 





* abhi 

(a) specially, being special, distinctive, 
e.g. Abhijanati-(One) knows in a special manner. 
[Abhi+janati]. 
Abhififia-special knowledge, psychic powers etc. 
[Abhi- fia]. 
Abhidhammo-special Dhamma [abhi--dhamma]. 

(b) beyond, 
e.g. abhikkamati-(It) goes beyond, proceeds, pleased. 
[abhit+kamati]. 
Abhikkanto-gone ahead, pleased. [abhit+kanto]. 

(c) very much, predominantly, 
e.g. Abhicchati-(He) wants it very much. [Abhiricchati]. 
Abhibhavati-(It) dominates. [Abhi+bhavati]. 
Abhibhüto-being overwhelmed. [Abhi--bhüto]. 
Abhirüpo-very beautiful. [Abhi+ripo]. 
abhinandati-(He) enjoys or likes very much. [abhitnandati] 
Abhinigganhati-(It) represses very much, restrains. 
[Abhi-ni-*ganhati |. 
Abhijjha-looking beyond, i.e. covetousness [Abhi+jha]. 

(d) towards, 
e.g. Abhimukham-face-ward, toward oneself. 
[Abhi--mukhar |]. 

(e) opposite, recklessly, wrongly, 








334 


Nàma Kappa 


e.g. Abbhacikkhati-(he) wrongly accuses, says the opposite. 
[Abhi+acikkhati]. 


(f) up, above, upward, 


e.g. Abhiruhati-(It) climbs up, grows up (as a tree). 
[Abhi+ruhati] 

Abhisifijati-(It) pours on, sprinkles on (as on a tree or on the 
hand or head). [Abhi+sifjati]. 

Abhiseko-such an act of sprinkling, in times of coronation 
of kings in ancient times, coronation itself is called “Ab- 
hiseka." [Abhi-*seko] 


9 pati 


(a) again, 


e.g. Paccagacchati-(He) comes back, returns. 
[Pati+a+gacchati] 

Paccagamanarh-such an act, coming back. 
[Patit+a+gamanam]. 

Note: Refer to Sutta 19 for Pacca-function. 

Patikaroti-(It) acts back, reacts, cures as with medicine. 
[Pati+karoti] 














(b) in response to, 


e.g. Patijanati-(He) knows back, admits [Pati+janati]. 
patinifia-such an act, confession, promise. [pati+na]. 
Pativadati-replies or responds. [Patit+vadati] 
Patikaroti-reacts, heals (an offence or a disease), repays a 
gratitude. [Pati+karoti] 

Patisunati-listens or responds. [Patit+sunati] 
pativacanam-reply word, response. [pati+vacanarh]. 


(c) instead of, in exchange for, (usually preceded by the word 


denoting to be replaced in the ablative case); 
e.g. telasma pati ghatam dadati. (Instead of sesame oil, (he) gives 
ghee). tilehi pati mase dadati. (Instead of sesame, (he) gives beans) 


(d) opposite of, against, contrary to, 


335 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


e.g. Pativirujjhati-(It) counteracts. opposes [Pati+virujjhati]. 
Pativirodho-opposition, disfavor [Patitvirodho]. 
Patipakkho-opposite party [Patitpakkho]. 
Patimukham-facing against, face to face. [Pati-mukham]. 
Patisotam-against current, upstream. [Pati+sotarh]. 
Pativatam-against the direction of the wind [Pati+vatarh]. 
Patikülam-disagreeable, unfavorable. [Pati+ktlarh]. 

(e) back, backward, 
e.g. Patikkamati-(He) moves back, returns [Pati--kamati]. 
patikkante-when returned [pati--kante]. 
patilomam-backward order, reversely. [pati+lomarh-hair]. 
Patikkhipati-(He) throws back, rejects. [Pati--khipati]. 
patikkhitto-having thrown back, being rejected, given up 
on. [Pati+khitto]. 

(f) representing, on behalf of, (usually preceded by a word to be 
represented in the ablative case, used as independent word), 
e.g. Buddhasma pati sariputto dhammarh deseti. i.e. Repre- 
senting Lord Buddha, Venerable Sariputta teaches the Dhamma. 

(g) similar to, an imitation of (a fake), being suitable, 
e.g. patirtiparh-image, suitable [pati+rupar]. 

(h) minor parts or limbs of the body such as fingers etc, 
e.g. paccangani-minor parts of the body [patitangani]. 

(i) intensifier, 
e.g. Patihafiriati-(he) feels hurt, stresses out. [pati--hafifati ]. 
Patigho-anger, stress. [pati+gho] 
Pativijjhati-knows penetratingly, enlightened. [pati+vijjhati] 


° Su 
(a) well, good, 
e.g. Sucaritam-good conduct or action [Su+caritam]. 
Sugandho-good smell [Su+gandho]. 
Sujano-good person [Su+jano]. 
Sugati-good rebirth [Su+gati]. 
(b) auspicious, 
e.g. Sukhano-auspicious moment [Su--khano]. 


336 


Nàma Kappa 


Svagatarh-auspicious coming, good coming. i.e. Welcome! 
[Su+a+gatam]. 
(c) being easy of, 
e.g. Sukaram-easy to do [Sutkararh]. 
Sulabham-easy to obtain [Sut+labham]. 
Sujjanam-easy to know [Su+janarh]. 
(d) abundance, 
e.g. Subhikkham-abundance of food. [Sut+bhikkharh]. 


oa 

(a) till, up to (used as an independent word in a sentence), 
e.g. à bhavagga-till the uppermost heaven. 
à Brahmaloka-till the world of Gods. 

(b) modifier affecting opposite meaning of the root it prefixed, 
in reverse of, 
e.g. Gacchati (he) goes» Agacchati-(He) comes 
[a gacchati]. 
Gamanarh-going>A gamanarh-coming [a*gamanari]. 
Yati (he) goes>Ayati-(He) comes [A+yati]. 
Dati-(he) gives. Adati-(he) takes. 
Danarh- giving>Adanarh-taking. 
Neti-(He) carries>Aneti-(He) brings [A+neti]. 

(c) upward, 
e.g. Aruhati-(He) climbs up. [A+ruhati]. 

(d) intensely, firmly, intensifier, 
e.g. Adanarh-intensely grabbing, clinging. [A+danarh]. 
Ahafifiati-(It) hurts intensely. [Athafifiati]. 
Aghato-hurt feelings, grudge. [A+ghato]. 


‘ati 

(a) over, very much, excessively, 
e.g. Aticchati-(He) wants it very much [Ati+icchati]. 
Aticcha-such an act [Ati+iccha]. 
Atirocati-(It) looks very much beautiful [Ati+rocati]. 
Atipanitam-very noble, the best. [Ati*Panitam] 


337 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


(b) beyond, transgress, across, 
e.g. Atikkamati-(He) moves beyond, transgress 
[Atit+kamati]. 
Atikkanto-gone beyond [Ati--kanto]. 
Accayo-act of going beyond, i.e. offense, fault. 
[accayo=atitayo]. 


9 api 

(a) also, too, 
e.g. Dhammam api-to the Dhamma also. 

(b) even though, although, even if, despite, 
e.g. Api dibbesu kamesu-even in divine pleasures (he does 
not enjoy). 

(c) introducing a question, 
e.g. Api bhante bhikkham labhittha? Have you got food 
Venerable Sir? 

(d) above, cover up, close on (used as prefix), 
Pidahati-(He) closes, covers [Pidahati-api--dahati] (Here, 
“a” is to be elided always). 
Apidhànam-cover of a pot etc. [Apitdhanarh]. 


9 apa 

(a) away from, off, 
e.g. Apakkamati-(He) moves away [Apatkamati]. 
Apagacchati-(It) moves away, disappears [Apa-gacchati]. 
Apeti (same meaning) [Apeti=apatitti]. 
Apaneti-(It) carries off, removes [Apa+neti]. 
Apanayanam-removal [Apat+nayanam]. 

(b) do away with, negatively, wrongly, 
e.g. Apavadati-(he) negatively says, rejects [Apat+vadati]. 
Apavado-verbal rejection of something [Apatvado]. 
Apakaroti-(He) does ungratefully or does away with other's 
good deed, ignores good-deed received from friends. 
[Apatkaroti]. 


338 


Nàma Kappa 


Apakaro-improper deed, wrong action, act of ingratitude. 
[Apatkaro]. 

Aparajjhati-(He) offends, or sometimes (it) fails to hit the 
target [Apatrajjhati]. 

Aparadho-Fault, offense, failure [Apa+radho]. 


* upa 
(a) near to, close by, towards, 


e.g. Upanisidati-(He) sits near [Upa+ni+sidati]. 
Upanisinno- having sat closely [Upa+nitsinno]. 
Upanagaram-near the city [Upatnagararh]. 
Upagacchati-approaches, i.e. goes near, toward. 
[Upatgacchati]. 

Upapajjati-closely happens, i.e. conceives or born. 
[Upatpajjati]. 

Upapatti-conception or birth [Upatpatti]. 








(b) firmly, intensifier, 


e.g. Upadanam-clinging [Upa+a+danarh]. 


(c) up, high (as in good-willed act, attaining a high condition 


etc.), 

e.g. Upakaroti-highly acts, i.e. helps [Upa-karoti]. 
Upakaro-such an act, a good-willed help (done usually by 
parents, good friends etc. [Upa-karo]. 
Upasampajjati-attains higher state [Upa-*sam-pajjati]. 
Upasampanno-having attained a higher state 

[Upa-*sam- panno]. 

Note: “rh” becomes “m” as it precedes "p". 


(d) allegation, 


e.g. Upavadati-(He) speaks closely, i.e. accuses. 
[Upa+vadati]. 
Upavado-accusation [Upatvado]. 





(e) deputy or assistant or the second in rank, subordinate, 


e.g. Uparaja-the crown prince [Upa+raja]. 
Upaukkatho-vice-chairman [Upatukkatho]. 


339 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


(f) over, exceeds (usually followed by a locative word in its con- 
text denoting the lesser amount or value), 
e.g. Upa khariyarh dono. A measure of “dona” is in excess 
of a “khari.” 


Translation of the Examples 

Having explained the meanings of upasagga particles in some 

detail, it is now more simple and easy for the students to figure 

out and understand the meaning of upasagga-prefixed nouns in 

Kita-affixes shown as examples in this Sutta. The following is 

a translation of the example words of Sutta: 

* paharo-carrying (instruments of harm) specially, i.e. beating, 
striking. [pa-specially+hara-carrying+na-suffix | 

e parabhavo-loss, ruin. [para-opposite+bhava-to be, being=ruin, loss] 

e nihàro, ® niharo-taking out, evicting. [ni-outHhara-carrying] (Both 
ni and ni are the same) 

e uharo-carrying up. [u-upthara-carrying] 

e duharo-carrying badly. [du-bad+hara-carrying ] 

e samharo-carrying well. [Sarin-well+hara-carrying] 

e viharo-carrying one's body specially, staying. [ vi-specially+hara- 
carrying. i.e. act of staying at a place using alternating bodily modes] 

* avaharo-carrying in a mean manner, i.e. stealing. [ava-lowly, 
contemptuous, mean+hara-carrying | 

e anuharo-carrying accordingly. [anu-following, subsequentthara- 
carrying | 

e pariharo-carrying from all around. [pari-all aroundt+hara-carrying| 

e adhiharo-carrying nicely. [adhi-specially, nicely+hara-carrying] 

e abhiharo-carrying toward. [abhi-toward+hara-carrying ] 

e patiharo-carrying again. [pati-againt+hara-carrying | 

e suharo-carrying well. [Su-well+hara-carrying | 

e aharo-carrying toward, food or meal. [a-toward--hara-carrying] 

e atiharo-carrying beyond or excessively. [ati-beyond, excessive 
hara-carrying] 

e apiharo-carrying down. [api-downward+hara-carrying | 


340 


Nàma Kappa 


e apaharo-carrying outward, i.e. removing. [apa-out, away+hara- 
carrying] 

* upaharo-carrying toward proximity, bringing up closer. [upa-near, 
close to--hara-carrying, complementary gift etc. | 

Note: à of the root "hara" is a vuddhi vowel which occurred due 

to the presence of a Kita na-affix applicable in the examples. 


THE NIPATA PARTICLES 
The Nipata words or particles are many and varied throughout Pali literature. 
They are so called as they can be found placed in the beginning, in the middle 
or at the end of sentences and words, but not as the prefixes of the roots. 
[niVpata-to fall. i.e. to be placed anywhere]. However, there are quite a few 
nipata particles which are placed before some verbs or Kita-affixed nouns 
and similarly used like prefixes. Here are a few of them: 
Antara-between, Avi, Patu-vividly, clearly. Sacchi-being a witness to, to- 
gether. Vina-without, being apart. Saha-together. Puna-again. 








Examples in front of the roots and verbs: 

(1) Antaradhayati-(he) disappears. [ Antara*dhayati] 

(2) Avikaroti-(he) makes it openly, displays clearly. [Avitkaroti] 
(3) Patubhavati-(It) arises visibly, i.e. appears. [Patu-*bhavati] 

(4) Sacchikaroti-(he) realizes, i.e. attains. All are av [Sacchi+karoti] 
Examples in front of various nouns: 

(5) Vinabhavo-separation, being apart. kn [Vina+bhavo] 

(6) Sahacari-the one who used be together, a friend. kn [Saha+cārī] 
(7) Punabbhavo-being born again, rebirth. kn [Punat+bhavo] 


The following is a brief descriptive list of some nipdta words shown in this 
Sutta. Some are plain nipdtas without any affix, while some are with inde- 
clinable affixes. Some may even have a sort of vibhatti-ending in them. 
Any vibhatti applied after most of the nipáta words are generally elided. As a 
rare exception, some may still have traces of vibhattis. Please note that the 
implied meaning of elided vibhatti still remains in effect for some nipata 
words such as yatha, tatha and evar etc. To gain mastery of the language, 
the students should also study the meanings and usage of both upasagga and 
nipáta words in addition to the general aspects of grammar. 


e yatha, ® tatha-in a manner that, in such a way as [A combination of Sab- 


banama noun “ya” “ta” with indeclinable affix “tha”. The affix itself is ex- 
pressive of manner or mood.] 


341 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


e evam-thus, in this way, true as it is said, yes. (Many meanings) [This 
nipdta is used in accusative-case ending "am", very frequently used in Pali 
texts. | 

* khalu-used mostly in a reported narrative. 

* kho, a plain nipáta, mostly meaningless, but found often in main Buddhist 
texts. Used together with “atha” “evar” “tarh” etc. Sometimes it may mean 
“only, really”. 

e tatra-there, [a combination of Sabbanama noun “ta” with indeclinable 

affix "tra".] 

* atho-in addition, besides. 

* atha-now, then, later on, if. [Sometimes used in the beginning of a chapter 

or an episode, as an introductory or initiating word] 

* hi-really, for, only. [Sometimes a meaningless particle.] 

* tu-in addition, only. [Also an expletive without meaning, sometimes 

added to be more emphatic in a statement.] 

e Ca-also, too. [It is used to express some additional meaning in grammatical 


texts. Sometimes meaningless. Sometimes it has a lot of meanings when 
used after other nipdata particles] 

* Và-similar to either or, in other ways. [In grammatical texts, sometimes it 
is used to express other option or method or inconsistency of a function. 
Sometimes with no particular meaning.] 

® VO-you. [It is sometimes a meaningless expletive. | 

* ham, * ahari. the use of these two nipdta are seldom found in texts 

unless it means “T”. 

* alam-is widely used to express: 

(a) enough, (b) suitable, (c) worthiness, (d) appropriateness, (e) ability. 
Also, (f) sometimes used as a prohibition or rejection, usually used in 
combination with (1) a noun in instrumental case, or (2) tum-infinitive 
Kita verbs or (3) an aya-infinitive in dative case nouns. 

e eva, equal to “only”, used next to the word it want to modify or restrict or 

confirm in its implied meaning. [A plain nipata.] 

* ho!, * aho!, these are expression of interjection or surprise. No vibhatti. 

e he! * ahe! * re! ® are!. Vocative nipáta particles, similar to “hey” in 

English. Usually vocative case vibhatti is applicable, but to be elided. 
Eva’madihi nipatehi ca yojetabbani. 
Thus, after such and other nipata words too, the function of this 
Sutta (i.e. elision of the applied vibhattis) should be applied. 


342 


Nàma Kappa 


Caggahana’mavadharana’ttham. 
The word “ca” in Sutta has a purpose of affirming the function 
of the Sutta. 


२२२, ३४२. पुमस्स लिज्ञादीसु समासेसु 
222, 342. Pumassa linga'disu samasesu. 
[Pumassa+linga-adisu+samasesu. 3 words] 
[V] Puma-icce'tassa anto lopa' mapajjate linga'disu parapadesu 
samasesu. 


When the word “puma (male)" is joined in a compound pro- 
cess with other words (such as linga, bhava, kokila) in a 
samasa, the last component vowel “a” of “ma” in the word 
“puma” is to be elided. [After elision, only “pum” will remain] 


6699 


(See the example words shown below. See that after “a” is elided, “m” 
also changed into m by Sutta 82. Then it either changed into 1, m, or n. 
See the underlined syllable in the examples which derives from m. Also 
see Sutta 82 to understand more clearly). 


e pullingarh-male manner. * pumbhavo-malehood. ® puhkokilo- 
male koel bird, also called black cuckoo. cn, ns. 

Pumasse'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “pumassa” for? To show that examples 
below are inapplicable as they do not have the word *pu- 
ma" in them. 

* itthilingarh-feminine manner/gender, * napumsakalingam- 
neuter manner/neuter gender. cn, ns. 

Lingadisü'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “lingadisu” for? To show that example 
below is inapplicable as it does not have the word *linga". 
* pumitthi-male, female. cn, ns. 


SamAasesii’ti kimattham? 

What is the word *samasesu" for? To show that example 
below is inapplicable as it is not a compound noun word 
(samasa). (It is only an incomplete sentence) 

* pumassa-of male. gs. Jihgarh-appearance. ns. 


343 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


333, १८८. अं य मीतो पसञ्ञतो 

223, 188. Am ya’mito pasafiiiato. 
[Am-yam-ito-*pasafifiato. 4 words] 

[V] Amvacanassa yam hoti và Ito pasafifiato. 


The dutiya singular vibhatti “arm”, applied after pa-named, 
“Tending nouns of feminine gender, sometimes changes in- 
to “yarn”. [This Sutta changes accusative, singular “ar” into “yar”. 


See “yarh” shown underlined in the example. The second is inapplica- 
ble.] 


e itthiyam, * itthirh-to the woman. as. 
yam 


Pasafifiato'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “pasaññato” for? To show that examples 
below are inapplicable as they are not pa-termed nouns. (The 
ending “T’ of these nouns is a “jha”, not “pa”. Hence, inapplicable) 

* dandinarh-to the one having stick. 

* bhoginam-to the one having wealth. tn in as. 


A' miti kimattham? What is the word “am” for? To show 
that example below is inapplicable as it is not of *am- 
vibhatti". 

* jtthihi-with/by/from women. ip, abp. 


२२४, १५३. नं झतो कतरस्सा 

224, 153. Nam jhato katarassa. 
[Narh+jhatot+katarassa. 3 words] 

[V] Tasma jhato katarassa arhvacanassa nam hoti. 


The vibhatti “arn” applied after nouns ending in jha-named 
नु” but later shortened into an “i”, sometimes changes into a 
"nam". [This Sutta changes accusative singular arh into nar after T" 
is shortened by Sutta 84. The applied function “nam?” is shown under- 


lined below] 


e dandinam, ® bhoginath. (Refer Sutta 223 for meaning) 


344 


Nàma Kappa 


Jhato'ti kimattharh? 

What is the word “jhato” for? To show that the example be- 
low is inapplicable as it does not have a jha-termed “1 ". (It 
has only a “la-termed ü," but shortened, shown underlined.) 


* vessabhum-to the Buddha named *Vessabhü". as. 


Katarassa'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “katarassa” for? 

To show that the example below is inapplicable as it has a 
natural rassa (akatarassa). (This Sutta's function is applica- 
ble for only those nouns with morphologically altered ras- 
sa). 

* kucchirh-to the stomach. as. 


२२५, १५१. योनं नो 
225, 151. Yonam no. [Yonam-*no. 2 words] 
[V] Sabbesam yonarh jhato katarassa no hoti. 


The vibhatti “yo” applied after jha-named “T-ending” nouns 
and later shortened into “i”, changes into “no”. 

[This Sutta changes “yo” into “no” after Rassa process by Sutta No. 84. 
See “no” function shown underlined below. | 


[Nominative “yo”] * dandino-those having sticks. 

* bhogino-those having wealth, wealthy, np, ap. 

[Vocative *yo"] he * dandino-Oh those having sticks! 

he * bhogino-Oh wealthy! vp. 

Katarassa’ti kimattham"? 

What is the word “katarassa” for? To show that the exam- 


ples below are inapplicable as they have a natural rassa 
(akatarassa). 


* aggayo, * munayo, * isayo. 
Jhato'ti kimattham? 
What is the word “jhato” for? To show that the example be- 


low is inapplicable as it does not have a jha-termed “ 1". 
(The example has only a “la-termed ü, but shortened") 
* sayambhuno np, ap. 


345 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


Yonan'ti kimattham? 

What is the word *yonam" for? To show that the examples 
below are inapplicable as they are not of “yo”. (It is only a 
“na” vibhatti in both examples) 

* dandina-with the one who has stick. 

* bhogina-with wealthy one. is. 


२२६, १५४. स्मिनि 


226, 154. शा) ni. [Smirh+ni. 2 words] 
[V] Tasma jhato katarassa smirhvacanassa ni-adeso hoti. 


The vibhatti *smim" applied after jha-named “T-ending” 
nouns and later shortened into “i”, changes into “ni”. [This 
Sutta changes “smirh” into “ni” which is applied after jha-termed, T- 
ending nouns, after 1 has been shortened by Sutta No. 84] 

e dandini-in the one having stick. ® bhogini-in wealthy one. Js. 
Katarassa'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “katarassa” for? To show that the example 
below is inapplicable as it has a natural rassa (akatarassa). 

* vyadhimhi-at disease/ sickness. Is. 


२२७, २७०. किस्स क वे च 
227, 270. Kissa ka ve ca. [Kissatkat+vetca. 4 words] 
[V] Kim-icce'tassa ko ca hoti va-paccaye pare. 


The interrogative sabbanama noun "kir (what)" changes 
into “ka” when a “va” affix is applied after it. 
[See changed “k” shown underlined below. ] 


e kva-where. ind. gato’si [gato’si=gatotasi] gato-gone. kn. 


asi-is. av. tvarh-you. devanam piyatissa-King devanarh piya 
tissa! i.e. Where did you go King Devanarh Piyatissa? 


Caggahanena a-vapaccaye pare’pi ko ca hoti. 
By the word “ca” in Sutta, “kim” can also be changed into 


“ka” when non-va affixes such as tham" and other ordi- 
nary vibhattis are applied after “kim”. [See changed “k” of 


346 


Nàma Kappa 


“kim” shown underlined below. | 

[Kir in “Si” Vibhatti Example] ° ko-who. ns. tarh-to that person. as. 
ninditu’marahati. [ninditu’marahati= ninditurh+arahati] ninditum- 
for blaming, censuring. kv. arahati-deserves. av. i.e. Who deserves to 
blame that person? 

[kir in thar-affix] ° katharh-how. ind. bodhayiturh-to enlighten or 
to made known. kv. dhammam-Dhamma. as. i.e. How one should 
make Dhamma known? 

Ve'ti kimattham"? 

What is the word “ve” for? To show that example below is 
inapplicable as it does not have a “va” affix in it. [It means 
that there is no function in case of to-affixed words such as “kato” etc. 
Instead, another function of changing into “ku” etc. is applicable] 

* kuto-whence, from where. ind. àgato'si [Agatosi=agatotasi] āga- 
to=come. kn in ns. asi-is? av. tvarh-you. ns. i.e. Where did you come 
from? 


२२८, २७२. कु हिंहंसु च 
228, 272. Ku him,ham,su ca. [Kuthith, ham, su+ca. 3 words] 
[V] Kim"icce'tassa ku hoti him,ham,icce'tesu ca. 


The interrogative sabbanama noun “kim” changes into 


“ku” when ‘him, ham" affixes follow after it (i.e. applied af- 
ter it). [See changed “ku” of “kim” shown underlined below.] 


e kuhirn- Where. ind. gacchasi-(do you) go? av. i.e. Where do you 
go? 

e kuhar, ind. gacchasi. av. (The same meaning). 

Caggahanena hificanam,dacanam-paccayesu paresu 

afifattha’pi ku hoti. 


By means of “ca”, “kim” can also change into into “ku” 


when affixed with “hificanam, dacanam". 
[See changed “ku” of *kim" shown underlined] 
e kuhificanam. ® kudacanam-occasionally, in no time. ind. 


347 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


२२९, २२६. VAT च 
229, 226. Sesesu ca. [Sesesu+ca. 2 words] 
[V] Kim'"icce'tassa ko hoti sesesu vibhattipaccayesu paresu. 


The interrogative sabbanama noun “kim” changes into 
“ka” when followed by the remaining vibhatti and affixes. 


[ko-what. pakaro-manner?.] ® katharh-how, what manner? 
[karh-to what. pakaram-manner?] ® katham-how, to what man- 
ner?. ind. 


Note: The words shown within bracket are called *Viggaha" or etymological 
definition or expansion of the example word in the grammatical analy- 
sis known as “Viggaha”. Here, Ka is expanded by “Ko” a nominative 
singular while *tham" is expanded by the word “pakaro” which means 
that the indeclinable affix tham here signifies manner. In the second 
Viggaha, the expansion is shown by using accusative singular for both 
components with the same meaning. Finally, when these two words are 
combined, it becomes Katham which means “which manner" “how”. 


Caggahana’manukaddhana’ttham. 
The word “ca” in Sutta has a purpose of pulling in “the ka- 
changing function" from Sutta 227 to this Sutta. 


२३०, 3&3. त्रतोथेसु च 
230, 262. Tra,to,the,su ca. [Tra, to, the, sutca. 2 words] 
[V] Kimicce’tassa ku hoti tra,to,tha,icce’tesu ca. 


The interrogative sabbanama noun “kim” changes into 
“ku” when affixed with “tra, to, tha affixes". 
[See changed “ku” of *kim" shown underlined below.] 


* kutra-where. * kuto-from where, for what reason, why. 
[2 meanings] * kuttha-where. ind. 


Caggahana’manukaddhana’ttham. 

The word “ca” in Sutta has a purpose of pulling in the word 
“Kissa” from Sutta No. 227, and “ku-changing function” 
from Sutta No. 228 to this Sutta. [*Ca" thus pulls two things from 
the preceding Suttas to this Sutta] 


348 


Nama Kappa 


332, 3&3. सब्बस्सेतस्साकारो वा 
231, 263. Sabbasse’tassa’karo va. 


[Sabbassatetassatakarot+va. 4 words] 
[V] Sabbassa etasaddassa akaro hoti va to,tha-icce’ tesu. 


The entire sabbanama noun “eta (that)" sometimes changes 
into “a” when affixed with “to, tha". [See changed “a” of “eta” 
shown underlined below] 


* ato-thence, for that reason. * attha-there, at that place. 
* etto, * ettha. ind. (Inapplicable examples of the same meaning) 


333, २६७. त्रे निच्चं 
232, 267. Tre niccam. [Tre-*niccam. 2 words] 
[V] Sabbassa etasaddassa akaro hoti niccam tra-paccaye pare. 


The entire sabbanama noun word “eta” always changes into 
“a” when affixed with “tra”. [This means that “atra” not “etra” is 
a consistent pattern. See changed “a” of “eta” shown underlined] 


* atra-there, at that place or position. ind. 


२३३, २६४. ए dag च 
233, 264. E to,the,su ca. [E+to, the, sutca. 3 words] 
[V] Sabbassa etasaddassa ekaro hoti va to,tha-icce’tesu. 


The whole sabbanama word “eta” sometimes changes into 


“e” when affixed with “to, tha". 
[See changed “e” of “eta” shown underlined] 


* etto, * ato-from there. * ettha, * attha-at that place, there. ind. 


349 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


२३४, २६५. इमस्सि थंदानिहतोधेसु च 
234, 265. Imassi’tham,dani,ha,to,dhe,su ca. [Imas- 
sati+tharh, dani, ha, to, dhe, sutca. 4 words] 
[V] Imasaddassa sabbasse’va ikaro hoti 
tham,dani,ha,to,dha-icce'tesu. 


The whole sabbanama word “ima (this)" changes into “i” 
when affixed with “tharh, dani, ha, to, dha”. [This Sutta 
changes “ima” which is suffixed with “tharh, dani, ha, to, dha” affixes 


८८५११ 66:११ 


into “i”. See changed “i” of “ima” shown in bold, underlined below.] 


e jttharh-in this manner, thus [one dissimilar “t” reduplicated]. 
* idani-now, at this moment. * iha-here, at this place. 
* ito-from here. * idha-here, at this place, in this world. ind. 


२३५, २८१. अ धुनाम्हि च 
235, 281. A dhunamhi ca. [A+dhunamhitca. 3 words] 


[V] Imasaddassa sabbasse'va akaro hoti dhunamhi paccaye 
pare. 


The entire sabbanama word “ima” changes into “a” when 
affixed with “dhuna”. 
[See changed “a” of “ima” shown underlined below] 


* adhuna-now, at this moment, nowadays. ind. 


Caggahana'mavadharana'ttham. 
The word “ca” has a purpose of affirming the function of 
the Sutta as being consistent. 


२३६, २८०. एत रहिम्हि 

236, 280. Eta rahimhi. [Etatrahimhi. 2 words] 

[V] Sabbasse'va imasaddassa eta’deso hoti rahimhi paccaye 
pare. 
The whole sabbanama word “ima” changes into “eta” when 
affixed with “rahi”. 
[See changed “eta” of “ima” shown underlined below. ] 


* etarahi-now, at this time, in this moment, nowadays. ind. 


350 


Nama Kappa 


२३७, १७६. इत्थिय मतो आपच्चयो 

237, 176. Itthiya' mato apaccayo. 
[Itthiyam-ato-*apaccayo. 3 words] 

[V] Itthiyam vattamanaya akarato apaccayo hoti. 


An "a" affix has to be added to all a-ending nouns when 
signifying the feminine gender. (See the affix “a” shown under- 
lined below) 


e sabba-all. * ya-which. ® sà-that. ० ka-what/what woman. 

e katara-which. ns. 

Note: This affix “a” and "T" "inr" affixes signify feminine 
gender. The affix "1" is applied by next two Suttas 238-239 
while "inr" is applied by Sutta 240. 


२३८, १८७. नदादितो वाई 

23 8, 187. Nada'dito và 1. [Nada-adito+vati. 3 words] 

[V] Nada’dito và anada'dito và itthiyam vattamanaya I-paccayo 
hoti. 


To signify feminine gender, an ‘T’ affix should be applied 
after *nadi (river)" and other words. 
(See the affix “1” shown in bold, underlined below) 


e nadI-river. ० mahl-earth. ® kumàrI-unmarried girl. ® tarunI-young 
female. ० sakhi-female friend. ® itthI-woman. ns. 


२३९, १९०. णवणिकणेय्यणन्तुहि 
239, 190. Nava,nika,neyya,na,ntu,hi. 
[Nava, nika, neyya, na, ntu, hi. 1 word] 
[V] Nava,nika,neyya,na,ntu,icce’tehi itthiyam 
vattamanehi I-paccayo hoti. 


To signify feminine gender of the nouns already affixed 
with nava, nika, neyya, na, ntu, affixes, one more vowel 
“बु” is to be added after them. (See the affix “1” shown in bold, un- 
derlined below) 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


[nava-affixed example] * manavi-the daughter of Manu. 
e pandavI- the daughter of Pandu. 

[nika-affixed] * navikI-boatman's wife. 
[neyya-affixed] ° venateyyl- the daughter of Vinata. 

e kunteyyl- the daughter of Kunti. 
[na-affixed] * gotamI- the daughter of Gotama. 
[ntu-affixed] * gunavati-the virtuous lady. 
[guna-virtue+vati-the woman who has]. 
* samavati-the woman who has golden color of skin. 
[sama-golden complexion+vati-the woman who has] (all ns.) 


२४०, १९३. पतिभिक्खुराजीकारन्तेहि इनी 
240, 193. Pati,bhikkhu,rajr karantehi ini. 
[Pati, bhikkhu, rajr karantehi*ini. 2 words] 
[V] Pati,bhikkhu,rajr'kara'ntehi itthiyarh vattamanehi 
inipaccayo hoti. 


To signify feminine gender, an * inr" affix is to be added 
after pati, bhikkhu, raja and other r-ending nouns. 

(See the affix “int” shown in bold, underlined below. There is some 
morphological change in the first two examples) 


e gahapatant-the female lord of the house, housewife. 
e bhikkhuni-female monk. ® rajinI-wife of someone of royal blood. 
e hatthini-she-elephant. ० dandini-the woman who has a stick. 


e medhavini-woman-scholar. ० tapassinI-female-ascetic. 
(all examples are ns.) 


२४१, १९१. न्तुस्स त मीकारे 
241, 191. Ntussa ta^ mikare. [Ntussa+tam+īkāre. 3 words] 
[V] Sabbasse'va ntupaccayassa t-karo hoti va Ikare pare. 


When an ‘T° affix is applied after a ntu-suffixed feminine 
gender noun, that whole "ntu" shall change to become a 
single “t”. (Later, that “t” has to be attached to *1"). 

[See each pair shown below. The second is inapplicable. “tr & ntt" are 
shown in bold to make it easily understandable] 


352 


Nàma Kappa 


e gunavati, * gunavanti-the virtuous woman. (all examples are ns.) 

e kulavati, * kulavanti-a lady of prestigious family. 

० satimati, * satimanti-the woman who has “sati-alertness”. 

e mahati, * mahanti-the noble or great woman. 

e gottamati, * gottamanti-the woman who has high caste, woman 
of high caste (by being born into it). 


२४२, १९२. भवतो भोतो 

242, 192. Bhavato bhoto. [Bhavato+bhoto. 2 words] 

[V] Sabbasse'va bhavantasaddassa bhota’deso hoti 1kare 
itthigate pare. 


The whole word bhavanta-(your honorable), changes to “bho- 


ta” when a feminine-gender “TY” affix follows it. (See Sutta 
No. 238 for affix "1". The example is only the word “Bhoti”, not ac- 


como 


companying words. The affix 4” is shortened which later becomes 
*Bhoti".) 


e bhoti ayye! * bhoti kafifie! ® bhoti kharadiye! vs. 
(Refer to Sutta No. 57 for the meaning of examples.) 
Note: The word *Bhoti" is a polite form of address to a female. 


२४३, ११०. भोगेतु 
243, 110. Bho ge tu. [Bho-ge-tu. 3 words] 
[V] Sabbasse’va bhavantasaddassa bho-adeso hoti ge pare. 


When vocative singular “si” vibhatti follows, the whole of 


the word bhavanta changes to “bho”. (The example is only the 
word “Bho”, not accompanying words in vocative case.) 


* bho purisa!-Oh man! ० bho aggi!-Oh fire! * bho raja!-Oh king! 
* bho sattha!-Oh teacher! * bho dandi!-Oh the one who has stick! 
* bho sayambhu!-Oh self-enlightened Buddha! vs. 

Note: “bho” is a vocative particle used before nouns of masculine gen- 
der, while *bhoti" is used for the nouns of feminine gender. 

Ge'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “ge” for? 

To show that the examples below are inapplicable as they 


353 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


66199 


are not “ga-termed si". They are of “na” and ordinary “si 
vibhattis. 

* bhavata-by your honor, is. * bhavarh-your honor. ns. 
*3Tuggahanena afifiasmim'pi vacane sabbassa 
bhavantasaddassa bhonta,bhante,bhonto,bhadde,bhota, 
bhoto,icce'te adesa honti. 


१०९. ओभावो क्वचि योसु वकारस्स. 


23 109. Obhavo kvaci yosu vakarassa. 


[V] 


[Obhavo+kvacityosut+vakarassa. 4 words] 
Bhavanta-iccetassa vakarassa o-bhavo hoti kvaci 


yo-iccetesu. 


The “va” of “bhavanta” optionally changes into “o” when 
“yo” is applied after the bhavanta. 


[Function is shown in bold, underlined. It is easily understandable] 
Imam-this stuff. as. ० bhonto-your honorables. np. nisametha-keep 
it back or keep in mind. i.e. restore this stuff (in its original place in an 
orderly manner) or keep in mind (by listening attentively. Two possible 
meanings) 

* bhavanto-your honorables. np. ap. [This is inapplicable example] 


१११. भदन्तस्स भद्दन्त,भन्ते, 
111. Bhadantassa Bhaddanta, bhante. 


[V] 


[Bhadantassa+Bhaddanta, bhante. 2 words] 
Sabbasse'va bhadanta-saddassa bhaddanta,bhante-iccete 
adesa honti kvaci ge pare yosu ca. 


The whole word *bhadanta-your honorable" optionally 
changes into either bhaddanta or bhante when “4 vocative 
singular ga-termed "si" or “yo” is applied after it. 

he * bhaddanta! vs. * bhante!-Oh, your honorable, or venerable! 
vs. vp. 


* bhaddanta-Your honorables or venerables. np, vp, ap. và-also in 
noun word “bhadanta” of “yo”. (inapplicable example) 


354 


Nàma Kappa 


By the word “tu” in Sutta, the word *bhavanta" can also 
change into “ bhonta, bhante, bhonto, bhadde, bhota, 
bhoto" in cases of other vibhattis. 

* bhonta! vs. * bhante! vs. vp. * bhonto!-honorable sir!, 

vp, np, ap. 

* bhadde!-Oh honorable lady! madam! vs. 

* bhotà-by honorable. is. * bhoto-of honorable person. ds, gs. 
Note: Some of the functions applicable by means of “tu” are quite sim- 
ilar to the two Suttas mentioned in Rüpasiddhi and in earlier version of 
the text though not found in Myanmar and Sri Lanka versions. 


See those two Suttas together with complete translation shown in 
the footnote. 


The Different Usages 


of Vocative Form "Bhavanta". 


(1) Bhante is generally used when addressing monks, ascetics 


and people of senior rank as a token of politeness. 


(2) Bhonta, Bhonto are forms of both vocative particles used to 


address general class of people as a polite form of address. 


(3) Bhadde is specifically used for addressing women of respect 


and to politely address one's wife or any woman. 


२४४, 93. अकारपिताद्यन्तान मा 
244, 72. Akarapitadya’ntana’ma. 


[Akara, pitu-adi-antanam-a. 2 words] 


[V] Akaro ca pitadina’manto ca atta’mapajjate ge pare. 


The component vowels *a, u" of words like purisa (man), 
pitu (father) etc., changes to “a” when a vocative singular 


ga-named “si” vibhatti is applied after it. (See the applied “a” 
shown in bold, underlined below) 


bho * purisa!-Oh man! bho ° raja!-Oh king! bho ® pita!-Oh fa- 
ther! bho * mata!-Oh mother! bho * sattha!-Oh teacher! vs. 


355 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


२४५, १५२. झळपा रस्सं 
245, 152 Jha,la,pa rassam. [jha, la, pa*rassam. 2 words] 
[V] Jha,la,pa,icce’te rassa' mapajjante ge pare. 


The “4, a” of jha, la, pa-named, 1, ü-ending nouns are to be 
shortened when a vocative singular "si" vibhatti is applied 


after them. 
(See the shortened “i-u” shown in bold, underlined) 


bho * dandi!-Oh the one who has stick! 
bho * sayambhu!-Oh self-enlightened Buddha! 
bhoti * itthi!-Oh woman! bhoti * vadhu!-Oh daughter-in-law! vs. 


२४६, ७३. आकारो वा 
246, 73. Akaro va. [Akaro+va. 2 words] 
[V] Akaro rassa'mapajjate và ge pare. 


The morpheme vowel “a” of nouns (prescribed in Sutta No. 
244) is shortened into “a” sometimes when a vocative sin- 
gular “si” vibhatti is applied after it. 

(Both examples in each pair are in vocative, one with a shortened “a”, 
shown in bold, underlined and the other not shortened, inapplicable ex- 
ample) 

bho * raja! * Bho raja!-Oh king! 

bho * atta! * Bho atta!-Oh body or soul! 

bho * sakha! * Bho sakha!-Oh friend! 

bho * sattha! * Bho sattha!-Oh teacher! vs. 


Iti namakappe catuttho kando. 
The Fourth Section of Noun ends. 


356 


Nama Kappa 


Paficama Kanda 
The Fifth Section 


२४७, २६१. त्वादयो विभत्तिसञ्ञायो. 
247, 261. Tva'dayo vibhattisafifiayo. 
[To-adayo+vibhattisaiifiayo. 2 words] 
[V] To-adi yesam paccayanam, te honti tva’dayo. 
[This is a Bahubbihi Samasa ED of the word *tva'dayo"] 
Te paccaya tva’dayo vibhattisaffia’va datthabba. 


All the indeclinable affixes such as **to" (pronounced as “taw”) 
etc, are to be regarded as equals to the ordinary vibhattis 


applied after ordinary nouns. 

[This means that those affixes have the same grammatical role of 
providing various meanings such as locative, ablative and so on in the 
same way just as the ordinary vibhattis do although they may assume 
morphologically unchanged forms. See the examples below to clarify 
this. See “to, da, dha” and “dani” affixes shown underlined in the ex- 
amples. ] 


[to-affixed] * sabbato-from all. * yato-from which. * tato-from that. 
० kuto-from where? * ato-from that. * ito-from here. 

[da-affixed] ° sabbada-at all times, always. ° yadà- at which time. 

* tada-at that time, then. ® kada-which time, when? 

[dha-affixed] * idha-here, at this place, at this point. 

[dani-affixed] ® idàni-now, at this time, at this moment. ind. 


२४८, २६०. क्वचि तो पञ्चम्यत्ये 
248, 260. Kvaci to paficamya'tthe. 


[Kvaci+to+paficami-atthe. 3 words] 
[V] Kvaci to-paccayo hoti paficamya'tthe. 


The “to” affix is sometimes to be affixed after various 
nouns in the sense of paficami vibhatti (ablative case). 


e sabbato, * yato, ° tato, * kuto, ® ato, ® ito. ind. 





Kvacr'ti kimattham? 
What is the word “kvaci” for? 


357 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


To show that the examples below are inapplicable as the 
word “kvaci” restricts the function of this Sutta on some 


words like those shown. 
It means that in addition to indeclinable affixes, ordinary vibhattis are 


a? 


also applicable after Sabbanama nouns. See “sma” applied after them. 
* sabbasma-from all. * imasma-from this. abs. 


२४९, २६६. AT सत्तमिया सब्बनामेहि 
249, 266. Tra,tha sattamiya sabbanamehi. 
[Tra, thatsattamiya+sabbanamehi. 3 words] 
[V] Tra,tha,icce’te paccaya honti sattamya'tthe sabbanamehi. 


The “tra, tha” affixes are applied after various sabbanama 
nouns in the sense of locative (sattami vibhatti). 

[See “tra, tha" affixes in the examples shown underlined. In “tha” af- 
fix, one dissimilar "t" is reduplicated.] 

* sabbatra, * sabbattha-at all places, everywhere. 

e yatra, ° yattha-at which place, where. 

* tatra, * tattha-at that place, there. ind. 


२५०, २६८. सब्बतो धि 

250, 268. Sabbato dhi. [Sabbato+dhi. 2 words] 

[V] Sabba-icce’tasma dhipaccayo hoti kvaci sattamya'tthe. 
The “dhi” affix is sometimes applied after the word “sab- 
ba-all” in the sense of locative (sattami vibhatti). 

[See “dhi” affix in the example shown underlined. | 


* sabbadhi, ind. 
* sabbasmith-at all places, everywhere. /s. (Only ordinary vibhatti 
“smirh” is applied in this example as implied by “kvaci”). 


358 


Nama Kappa 


२५१, २६९. किंस्मा वो 
251, 269. Kirnsma vo. [Kimsma-vo. 2 words] 
[V] Kimicce’tasma vapaccayo hoti sattamya’ tthe. 


The “va” affix is applied after interrogative sabbanama 
noun “kith” in the sense of locative (sattami vibhatti). 
[See “va” affix in the example shown underlined.] 


* kva gato'si tvam devanam piyatissa! ind. (Re: Sutta 227) 


२५२, २७१. हिंहंहिञ्चनं 
252, 271. Him,ham,hiticanam. 
[Hir, ham, hificanarh. 1 word] 
[V] Kimicce’tasma him,ham,hiücanam icce'te paccaya honti 
sattamya’ tthe. 


The “him, ham, hificanarh” affixes are affixed after inter- 
rogative noun "kim" in the sense of locative (sattami 


vibhatti). 
[See "him, hath, hificanarh” affixes in the examples shown under- 
lined. ] 


° kuhirh, ° kuham, ° kuhificanam-where? ind. 





२५३, २७३. तम्हा च 
253, 273. Tamha ca. [Tamha+ca. 2 words] 
[V] Tamha ca hirh,ham, icce'te paccaya honti sattamya'tthe. 


The "him, ham" affixes are to be affixed after sabbanama 
noun “ta” in the sense of locative (sattami vibhatti). 

[See "him, ham" affixes in the examples shown underlined. | 

* tahim, * taharh-at that place, there. ind. 


Caggahanam hificanaggahananivattana'ttham. 
The word “ca” in the Sutta has a purpose of debarring the 


use of affix “hificanarh” in the application of this Sutta’s 


function. 
(This means that there can be no such usage of words as tahificanam in 
the Buddhist texts). 


359 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


२५४, २७४. इमस्मा EST च 
254, 274. Imasma ha,dha ca. [Imasma+ha, dha+ca. 3 words] 
[V] Imasma ha,dha, icce'te paccaya honti sattamya’ tthe. 


The “ha, dha” affixes are applied after “ima” in the sense 
of locative (sattami vibhatti). 
[See “ha, dha” affixes in the examples shown underlined. | 


* iha, * idha-at this place, at this point, here. ind. 


Caggahana’mavadharana’ttham. 
The word “ca” in the Sutta has a purpose of affirming the 
function of Sutta. 


२५५, २७५. यतो fé 
255, 275. Yato him. [Yatothim. 2 words] 
[V] Tasma yato hirh-paccayo hoti sattamya’ tthe. 


The "him" affix is applied after “ya” in the sense of loca- 
tive (sattami vibhatti). [See “hirn” affix shown underlined.] 


e yahirh-at which place. ind. 


२५६, ०. काले 
256...kale. [Kale. 1 word] 
[V] “Kale” icce'tam adhikara'ttham veditabbam. 


This “Kale” Sutta is to be regarded as an adhikara Sutta. 


[This influences next three Suttas from 257 to 259, stating to the effect 
that the affixes to be applied through those four Suttas are meant for the 
expression of time. See the examples in those Suttas carefully to clarify 
this. In accordance with the term *adhikara", the word “Kale” will fol- 
low to next three Suttas 257, 258, 259 which can be found in the Vutti 


of each Sutta.] 


360 


Nàma Kappa 


२५७, २७६. किंसब्बञ्ञेकयकुहि दादाचनं 
257, 276. Kim,sabba’iinie’ka,ya,kuhi da,dacanam. 
[Kith, sabba, afifia, eka, ya, ku, hi--da, dacanarh. 2 words] 
[V] Kim,sabba,afüfia,eka,ya,ku icce’tehi 
da,dacanam, icce'te paccaya honti kale sattamya'tthe. 


The “da, dacanam" affixes are to be affixed after sab- 
banama nouns "kim, sabba, aiifia, eka, ya, ku” when ex- 
pressing time in the sense of locative (sattami vibhatti). 
[See “da, dacanam" affixes in the examples shown underlined. | 


e kadà-when, at what time. ® sabbada-at all times, always. 
* afifiada-at other time. ® ekada-at one time, once. 
e yada-at what time, when. * kudacanam-occasionally, never. ind. 


२५८, २७८. तम्हा दानि च 
258, 278. Tamha dani ca. [Tamha+danitca. 3 words] 
[V] Ta-icce’tasma dani,da-iccete paccaya honti 

kale sattamya’tthe. 


The “dani, da” affixes are to be affixed after sabbanama 
noun “ta” to express time in the sense of locative (sattami 
vibhatti). [See “dani, dà" affixes in the examples shown underlined. ] 


* tadani, ® tada-at that time, then. ind. 


Caggahana’manukaddhana’ttham. 

The word “ca” in Sutta has a purpose of taking in (pulling) 
“da” from the preceding Sutta. 

This means that although “dani affix” only is shown in Sutta, the “da” 
affix is also included in the application of this Sutta's function. Note 
that the word “tada” is more frequently found in Pali texts than 
"tadani". 


361 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


२५९, २७९. इमस्मा रहिधुनादानि च 
259, 279. Imasma rahi,dhuna,dani ca. 
[Imasma-rahi, dhuna, dani+ca. 3 words] 
[V] Imasma rahi,dhuna,dani icce'te paccaya honti kale 
sattamya’ tthe. 
The “rahi, dhuna, dani” affixes are to be affixed after the 
sabbanama noun “ima” in expression of time, in the sense 


of locative (sattami vibhatti). 
[See “rahi, dhuna, dani” affixes in the examples shown underlined. | 


e etarahi, ° adhuna, ° idani-now, at this time, at this moment. ind. 





Caggahana’manukaddhana’ttham. 
The word “ca” in Sutta has a purpose of taking in (pulling) 


the words “kale sattam'yatthe" from the preceding Suttas. 
(This means that the affixes shown in this Sutta signify “time in the loc- 
ative sense") 


२६०, २७७. सब्बस्स सो दाम्हि वा 
260, 277. Sabbassa so damhi va. 
[Sabbassa+so+damhi+va. 4 words] 
[V] Sabba-icce’tassa sakara'deso hoti va damhi paccaye pare. 


The whole of sabba changes into “sa” when a “da” affix is 
applied after it. [See changed “sa” shown underlined. The second 
example is inapplicable] 


* sada, * sabbada-at all times, always. ind. 


२६१, ३६९. अवण्णो ये लोपञ्च 

261, 369. Avanno ye lopafi'ca. 
[Avanno+yetloparh+ca. 4 words] 

[V] Avanno ye paccaye pare lopa'mapajjate. 


The component vowel of last consonant in a “nya-affixed” 
Taddhita noun, is to be elided when “ya” of that “nya-affix 
is after the word. (See Sutta No. 360 regarding “nya” affix and how 
the n" is elided). 


362 


Nàma Kappa 


Note: This Sutta elides the component vowel of the last consonant of a 
Taddhita-noun applied with a nya affix. The vowel is located right be- 
fore “ya”. Later, that vowel-less consonant is attached to “ya” for fur- 
ther morphological procedures. See more detailed explanation in Sutta 
269 to clearly understand this complex procedure. All examples are 
Taddhita-nouns from Taddhita section. 


e bahussaccam-a state of having much knowledge, 
knowledgeability. 

e pandiccam-a state of being wise, eruditeness. 

० vepullarh-a state of being abundant, abundance. 

० karufifiam-a state of being kind, compassion. 

e kosallam-a state of being skilled, skillful. 

e samafifiam-(a) a state of being a monk, monkhood, the goal of 

monkhood. Also, (b) a state of being similar, commonality, the ordi- 

nary. [Two possible meanings. Base word structure 1s also different de- 

pending on each different meaning]. 


e sohajjam-a state of having good heart, the good-willed. tn in ns. 


२६२, ३९१. Geel जो इयिट्ठेसु 
262, 391. Vuddhassa jo iyi’tthesu. 
[Vuddhassa+tjo+tya, itthesu. 3 words] 
[V] Sabbasse’va vuddhasaddassa jo-adeso hoti 
iya,ittha icce’tesu paccayesu. 


८८५११ 


The entire word “vuddha” changes into “j” when “iya, 


ittha" affixes are applied after the word vuddha. 
[Refer to Sutta 363 regarding affixes. See changed “j” shown in bold, 
underlined.] 


e Jeyyo-more senior. ® Jettho-the most senior. tn in ns. 


363 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


२६३, ३९२. पसत्थस्स सो च 
263, 392. Pasatthassa so ca. 
[Pasatthassat+so+ca. 3 words] 

[V] Sabbasse'va pasatthasaddassa so-adeso hoti, ja-deso ca 
iya,ittha icce'tesu paccayesu. 
The whole word “pasattha” changes into “s and j" when 
“iya, ittha" affixes are applied after the word pasattha. 
[See changed “S and J” shown in bold, underlined.] 


e Seyyo-more praised. ® Settho-the most praised, the best. tn in ns. 
(S-function applied in these examples) 

e Jeyyo, ° Jettho-the best, the most senior. tn in ns. (These two are 
examples of J-function). 


२६४, ३९३. अन्तिकस्स नेदो 

264, 393. Antikassa nedo. [Antikassatnedo. 2 words] 

[V] Sabbassa antikasaddassa neda'deso hoti 
iya,ittha 1006, tesu paccayesu. 


The entire word “antika” changes into “neda” when fol- 
lowed by “‘iya, ittha” affixes. [See changed “ned” shown under- 
lined.] 


* nediyo-more near. * nedittho-the nearest. tn in ns. 


२६५, ३९४. बाळहस्स साधो 

265, 394. Balhassa sadho. [Balhassa+sadho.2 words] 

[V] Sabbassa balhasaddassa sadha’deso hoti 
iya,ittha icce'tesu paccayesu. 


The whole word “balha” changes into “sadha” when “iya, 
ittha" affixes follows after it. [See changed “sadha” shown un- 
derlined] 


* sadhiyo-more strong. * sadhittho-the strongest. tn in ns. 


364 


Nama Kappa 


२६६, ३९५. अप्पस्स कण्‌ 

266, 395. Appassa kan. [Appassa+kan. 2 words] 

[V] Sabbassa appasaddassa kan-adeso hoti iya,ittha icce’tesu 
paccayesu. 


The whole word “appa” changes into “kan” when followed 
by “iya, ittha” affixes. [See changed “kan” shown in bold.] 


* kaniyo-the lesser. * kanittho-the least. £n in ns. 


२६७, ३९६. युवानञ्च 

267, 396. Yuvanafi'ca. [Yuvanar-ca. 2 words] 

[V] Sabbassa yuvasaddassa kan-adeso hoti iya,ittha icce’tesu 
paccayesu. 


The whole word “yuva” changes into “kan” when “iya, 


ittha" affixes are applied after it. [See changed "kan" shown in 
bold but n has to be changed into n by 404. See Sutta 396, Rüpasiddhi] 


* kaniyo-the younger. * kanittho-the youngest. fn in ns. 

[The second word form is found to be in widespread usage in the texts] 
Caggahana' manukaddhana' ttham.”4 

The word “ca” in Sutta has a purpose of pulling in the func- 


tion of “kan” from the preceding Sutta to this Sutta. 

Note: It is usually found as *kan" in Sanskrit grammars. 

[See Sutta 5-3-64, Panini] 

In Pali it is found as kan. This may be because the word kana is syn- 
onymous with other words such as “appa, kana, thoka, khuddaka etc,” 
which mean a few, a little, minuscule. 


२६८, ३९७. वन्तुमन्तुवीनञ्च लोपो 


268, 397. Vantu,mantu,vinafi'ca lopo. 
[Vantu, mantu, vi, narh+ca+lopo. 3 words] 
[V] Vantu,mantu,vi icce'tesam paccayanam lopo hoti 


?* Ca-saddagahanarn kangahana’manukaddhana’ttharh (Kaccayana grammar 
in devanāgarī edited by Lakhmi narayana tivari) 


365 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


iya, ittha icce'tesu paccayesu. 


The entire suffixes *vantu, mantu and vi,” are elided when 
additional “iya, ittha" affixes are to be applied after a noun 
which have already been suffixed with those “vantu, man- 
tu and vr" affixes. 

Note: This Sutta elides the pre-existing affixes such as “vantu, mantu, 
vi’ if other secondary form of affixes like “ iya, or ittha" are necessary 
to be added. (Refer to Suttas 368, 369, 364 regarding affixes “vantu, 
mantu, रा”) 

e guniyo-more virtuous. * gunittho-the most virtuous. 

* satiyo-more attentive. * satittho-the most attentive. 

* medhiyo-the wiser. ० medhittho-the wisest. tn in ns. 


२६९, ४१. Add तलणदकारानं ब्यञ्जनानि चलञजकारत्तं 
269, 41. Yavatam ta,la,na,da,karanam byafijanani 
ca,la,na,ja,karattam. 
[Yavatarh+ta, la, na, da, karanarnt+byanjananitca, la, fia, ja, 
karattam. 4 words] 
[V] Yakaravantanam ta,la,na,da-karanam byafijanani 
ca,la,fia,ja-karatta' mapajjante yathasankhyam. 


Those ta, la, na, da consonants of Taddhita nouns having a 
residual trace “ya” of nya-affix after them, respectively 
change into “ca, la, fia, ja". 

Note: “ya” affix in this Sutta refers to “nya” Taddhita affix whose "n" 
has been elided and only “ya” remained after elision. (See Sutta No. 
360, 396). Those morphed consonants “ca, la, fia, ja" are reduplicated 
afterwards to become complete words. Sutta 261 & 269 are related to 
each other in performance of the necessary morphological procedure on 
these words. All the complex morphological procedures are explained 
below in a very simple, understandable way. 


Explanation 
Now, let’s take a closer look at morphological solution by taking 
four example words because each of them consists of ta, la, na, 
da in them. (See those ta, la, na, da letters shown in bold) 


366 


Nama Kappa 


Here they are: 
(a) pandita-wise. (b) kusala-skill. (c) karun4-kindness. 
(d) suhada-good-heart. [su-good+hada-heart, i.e. goodwill] 


Step (a) 

Because we want all these words to express “being in a state of” 
i.e. the abstract expression, an affix “nya” has to be applied after 
each word by Sutta 360. So, the basic structural pattern of 
each example becomes as follows: 

(a) ° pandita+nya. (b) * kusala*nya. (c) ° karunatnya. 

(d) * suhadat+nya. 


Step (b) 
Here are necessary morphological procedures to be carried out 
further. 
(1) First, let's elide “p” of *nya-affix" in each example by Sutta 
No. 396 in Taddhita section. It will now look like this: 
(a) * panditatya. 
(b) * kusalatya. 
(c) * karunatya. 
(d) * suhadatya. 


(2) Second, by Sutta 261, all the vowel “a” of ta, la, na, da are 
to be elided. It becomes like this: t, 1, n, d. No more “a” is 
left. See below how it may looks like now: 

(a) ° pandit+ya. 
(b) * kusal+ya. 

(c) * karun+ya. 
(d) * suhad+ya. 


(3) Now, combine these “t, 1, n, d" vowel-less plain consonants 
to ya (a residual trace of a nya-taddhita affix). Now, it will 
look like this: tya, lya, nya, dya. 

See the examples carefully as shown. Remember what is said in 

the translation of Sutta which states: “Those ta, la, na, da con- 


367 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


sonants of Taddhita nouns having a residual trace ‘ya’ of nya- 
affix”. 

Also please refer to Pali words in Vutti of Sutta which said: 
“Yavatam ta, la, na, da karanath (yavatarh-having a ya, talanada 
karanarh-of those ta, la, na, da letters)”. 

This is what it becomes of now as shown here. The practical 
morphological solution and the explained rule of the Sutta are 
perfectly matched. See below how it all look now: 

(a) * panditya. (b) * kusalya. (c) * karunya. (d) * suhadya. 


Step (c) 

(1) Now, let's perform next morphological procedure again. 
This time, by this Sutta. We will change those ya-conjoined t, 
l, n, d consonants into c, 1, fi, j consonants respectively. 

(2) Now, here is the result: 
(a) ty> c» Augment it as per Sutta 28 with another similar 

c> ९९9? ° pandicca. 

(b) ly» 1 > Augment it with a similar I> lla? ® kusalla. 
(c) ny» fi» Augment it with a similar ñ> fifia> ° karufifia. 
(d) dy» j > Augment it with a similar j> jja> ® suhajja. 


(3) Now, we need to do a vuddhi procedure by Sutta 400 on b, 
d and c. This means that vowel “u” of both b and d has to be 
changed into an “0” while “a” of “ka” in c is to be length- 
ened. Suppose it has been carried out now and finished. It will 
look like this: 

(b) * kosalla. 
(c) ° kāruñña. 
(d) * sohajja. (Now, it is almost done, but not over yet). 

(4) To finalize all this, let's do a formal recognition procedure of 
all this almost-finished words as noun by Sutta 601 as these 
words are not actual nouns yet, but words in Taddhita-affix 
nya, in a state of morphological transit pending the comple- 
tion. After this formal recognition as “nouns”, a nominative 
singular "si" is to be applied after each word. 











368 


Nàma Kappa 


(5) Let's assume that all this is done and the words have been 
applied with “si” and will look like this: 

e pandicca-si. ° kosalla+si. ° kāruñña+si. ° sohajjatsi. 

(6) Next, that "si" is to be further changed into an “am” by Sut- 
ta 219. (Know that any noun affixed with a Taddhita affix 
“nya” belongs to neuter gender group. As such, the “si” has 
to be changed into an am") Now, it will look like this: 

e pandiccatam. ® kosallatarh. ® karufifiatarh. ० sohajjatarh. 


(7) Then, all vowel “0” after each duplicated words (refer to cca 
etc.) before the plus sign + are to be elided and keep as a “pa- 
kati" by Sutta 83 (keeping pakati means putting a stop to all further 


procedures. It also means that morphological procedures for these words 
are almost complete. So, no more action!). 


(8) Then, vowel-less conjuncts are attached to next “am” by 
means of Sutta 11. (A consonant can not be combined to two vowels 
at the same time. Hence, one must be elided.) Now, all the words become 
perfectly complete words with a distinctive gender and case-endings, 
ready to play any important role in the structure of a sentence and convey 


their relevant meanings. See the examples of Sutta as completed words 
shown below. 


* bahussaccam (a state of having much knowledge). 
[bahu-much-*suta-knowledge-nya] 

* pandiccar (a state of being wise). 

* vepullam (a state of abundance). 

० karufifiam (a state of being kind). 

* kosallam (a state of being skilled). 

e nepufifiam (a state of having deep wisdom). 
[nipuna-deep wisdom+nya] 

* samafifiam (a state of being a monk, monkhood or commonality, 
sameness). [samana-monk, or samana-same, common+nya| 

e sohajjarh (a state of being good-hearted). tn in ns. 

Yavata'miti kimattham? 

What is the word *yavatam" for? 

To show that the example below is inapplicable as it does not 


369 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


have a “ya” in it. 
* tinadalarh-grass and leaves (a Dvanda, copulative compound noun). 
Talanadakarana'miti kimattham? 
What is the word “talanadakaranam”’ for? 
To show that the examples below are inapplicable as there is 
no “ta, la, na, da", although they may have a “ya” in them. 
* alasyam-a state of being idle, i.e. laziness. 
[alasa-being lazy+nya-state] 
* arogyarh-a state of being without disease, or being healthy. 
i.e. healthiness. [aroga-being healthy+nya] 
Byafijanana’miti kimattham? 
What is the word “byafjananarh” for? 
To show that the example below is inapplicable as there is no 
"*byafijana-consonant", but an “a” of vibhatti “na” in the instru- 
mental case. 
* maccuna-by death (a plain noun). 


Karaggahanam kimattham? 

Yakarassa makara' desafiapana'ttham. 

What is the word “kara” for? 

The word “kara (refer to karanam)" in the Sutta, shows that the 
“y” (affix “y” of "nya") can change into an “m”. (It has to be 
reduplicated later on. See the example below to clarify this. “m” 
is shown in bold.) 

e opammarmo-similitude. [upama-being similar+nya.] 

“u” becomes “o”. Then, “a & n" are elided. “my” then becomes “m” and 
augmented as [opamma]. Afterwards, a nominative singular “si” is applied 
[opamma-si] and changed into “ar” [opammatam]. One “a” is to be elided. 
This is how the word is brought to completion by means of due morphologi- 
cal process. 


२७०, १२०. अम्हतुम्हन्तुराजब्रह्मत्तसखसत्थुपितादीहि स्मा नाव 

270, 120. Amha,tumha,ntu,raja,brahma'tta,sakha, 
satthu, pita’ dihi sma na’va. 
[Amha, tumha, ntu, raja, brahma, atta, sakha, satthu, pitu- 
adthi+sma+na+iva. 4 words] 


370 


Nàma Kappa 


[V] Amha,tumha,ntu,raja,brahma,atta,sakha,satthu,pitu- 
icce’va’madthi smavacanam na’va datthabbam. 


A “sma” vibhatti applied after nouns such as amha, tum- 
ha, ntu-affxed nouns, raja, brahma, atta, sakha, satthu, 
pitu etc, is to be regarded as an equal to ordinary “na 
vibhatti” (so that any necessary morphological procedure 
applicable to an ordinary na-vibhatti-applied nouns of in- 
strumental case can be done in the same way as in an origi- 
nal na-vibhatti-applied nouns.) 

Summary: This Sutta enjoins to recognize ablative singular 
“sma” as an equal of instrumental singular “na”. 


[amha] ° maya-from me. [all examples are abs. ] 
[tumha] * taya-from you. 

[ntu-affixed nouns] * gunavata-from virtuous one. 
[raja] ° rafifia-from king. 

[Brahma] ° brahmuna-from Brahma, God. 

[atta] * attana-from oneself. 

[sakha] ° Sakhina-from friend. 

[satthu] ° satthara-from teacher. 

[Pitu etc.] * pitara-from father. « matara-from mother. 
* bhatara-from brother. * dhitara-from daughter. 
* kattara-from doer. ® vattara-from speaker. 


Etehr' ti kimattham? 

What is the word “etehi” for? 

To show that the example below is inapplicable as the word 
is not relevant to those shown in Sutta such as “amha, tum- 


ha, etc.". 

(There is no need to recognize the vibhatti in it as a “na”. Actually, the 
vibhatti itself is an original *sma-vibhatti". Besides, there are no further 
morphological procedures needed for that word to be recognized as a 
“na”, except changing that sma-vibhatti directly into an à). 

* Purisa-from man. abs. 


Note: The purpose of recognition by this Sutta is only to facili- 
tate the necessary morphological procedures applicable for the 


371 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


ordinary instrumental singular “na” to be similarly applied on 
the ablative singular case sma-applied nouns too. However, the 
meaning of completed word will remain unchanged though. It 
has to be interpreted the same meaning of ablative, singular case 
“sma” such as “from, due to" etc. not “with, by". 


Iti namakappe paficamo kando. 
The Fifth Section of Noun ends. 


Namakappo nitthito. 
Nouns Chapter ends. 


372 


Karaka Kappa 


3. Karaka Kappa 


Karaka’ Chapter 
Various meanings and usage-rules of the Vibhatti (Noun case-endings) 
applied after parts of the sentences are explained in detail. Those parts, with 
the exception of Akhydta-verbs, upasagga & nipata particles, are formally 
known as “Karaka or non-Karaka". 


Chattha Kanda 


The Sixth Section of Noun 


२७१, ८८, ३०८. यस्मा दपेति भयमादत्ते वा तदपादानं 
271, 88, 308. Yasma’dapeti bhaya' madatte va 
ta’dapadanam. 
[Yasma+apeti+bhayam+adatte+va+tarh+apadanarh. 7 
words | 
[V] Yasma và apeti, yasma va bhayam jayate, yasma va adatte, 
tam karakam apadanasafifarh hoti. 





The place or source from which someone left or something 
originated, the source from which fear arises, the one from 
which one learns, such a source is named an *apadana". 


25 There are six Karakas. viz. Kattu, Kamma, Karana, Sampadana, Apadana 
and Okasa (also called Adhikarana) which are explained in this chapter. 
“Karaka” literally means the doer [kara*nvu]. Here, it means facilitator of an 
action. All necessary components of a sentence such as subject (Katta), object 
(Kamma) and so on, which helps in expressing a specific action and syntacti- 
cally related to the verb (i.e. action) are called “Karaka” as they play their 
respective roles in the expression of an action (i.e. verb) to be complete. 
Hence, each word named as a specific Karaka always has to have a specific 
vibhatti (noun case-ending) as prescribed in the relevant Suttas of the Karaka 
chapter. See the table on the next page. 
[Reference] © Tattha Karakam sadhakam kriyanipphattiyá karana ' muccate. 
Tam pana karakam chabbidham: kammam, kattà, karanam, sampaddna 'ma 
padana’mokdaso ca’ti. (Rüpasiddhi Pali Grammar, Sutta 285) 
© Yo karoti kriyam kattu-kammafthan ti sa karako. (Saddha'ttha-bhedacintà, 
Verse No.53) 


373 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


Tam yatha? 
What is that? i.e. For example. 
(1) * gàmà-from village. apenti-come off, depart. munayo-the 
sages. i.e. The sages depart from village. 
[Here, the sages left from village. So, the village has to be in ablative 
case to signify an apadana] 
(2) * nagara-from city. niggato-(had) left. raja-the king. 
i.e. The king departed from city. 
[Here, the king left from city. So, the city has to be in ablative case] 
(3) * cora-from thief. bhayam-fear. jayate-arises. 
i.e. The fear arises from thief. 
[Here, fear arises from thief. So, the thief has to be in ablative case] 
(4) * acariyu’pajjhayehi-from teachers and preceptors. sikkham- 
lesson. ganhati-takes. sisso-the pupil. i.e. The pupil takes lesson 
from teacher and preceptors. 
[Here, the pupil takes lessons from teachers and preceptors. So, they 
have to be in ablative, plural case to signify an apadana] 
Apadana'micca'nena kvattho? Apadane paficami. 
What is the benefit by terming "*apadana" ? 
It has the benefit of ease of reference in such Suttas as: 
" Apadane paficamr" etc. 


The Six Karaka and Applicable Vibhattis 



































Name of Applicable Vibhatti | Applicable Sutta 
Karaka (Case-ending) 
] | Kattu Nominative Lingatthe pathma 
2 | Kamma Accusative Kammatthe dutiya 
3 | Karana Instrumental Karane tatiya 
4 | Sampadana | Genitive Sampadane catutthi 
5 | Apadana Ablative Apadane paficamt 
| 6 | Okasa Locative Okase sattami 





Note: This table shows only the general rules of applicable vibhatti for each 
Karaka. There are other applicable exceptions which will be explained in 


detail in later part of this chapter. 


374 





Karaka Kappa 


२७२, ३०९. धातुनामान मुपसग्गयोगादीस्वपि च 
272, 309. Dhatunamana'mupasaggayogadisva'pi ca. 
[Dhatunamanarh+upasaggayoga-adisutapitca. 4 words] 
[V] Dhatunamanam payoge ca upasaggayoga’disva’ pi ca tam 
karakam apadanasafifiam hoti. 


An expression of *apadana" can also occur when used in 
the context of verbs with certain roots, nouns and some 
upasagga words and so on. 


Dhatunam payoge tava: 
First, (here are) the example of apadana expression in the context of 
(certain) roots of verbs. 


ji-iccetassa dhatussa parapubbassa payoge yo asaho, 

so apadanasafnifo hoti. 

When the root “ji” (to conquer) prefixed with para is used together, 
(the source from which) one is defeated, is named an apadana. (Hence, 


it has to be in the ablative case to signify it). The root ji prefixed with 
para means “being defeated, to lose in a fight or the struggle”. 


Tam yatha? For example: 

e Buddhasma-from Buddha. parajenti-(are) defeated. afifatit- 
thiyà-(those) holding other views, heretics. 

i.e. The heretics are defeated from (i.e. by) the Buddha. 


Bhü-icce'tassa dhatussa papubbassa payoge 
yato acchinnappabhavo, so apadanasafifio hoti. 
When the root “bhū”, prefixed with “pa” is used together (as a verb in 


a sentence), which means an initial originating source of a continuous 
occurrence, that source is an apadana. 


Tarh yatha? For example, 

(1) * himavata-from the mount Himavanta. pabhavanti-originate. 
pafica-five. mahanadiyo-great rivers. i.e. The five great rivers origi- 
nate from the mount Himavanta (Himalaya mountains from where riv- 
ers flow continuously). [pabhavanti=paVbhi+anti] 

(2) * anavatattamha-from lake anavatatta. pabhavanti-originate. 
mahasara-the great lakes. 

i.e. The great lakes originate from lake Anavatatta. 

(3) * aciravatiya-from the river Aciravati. pabhavanti-originate. 


375 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


kunnadiyo-The small creeks. 

i.e. The small creeks originate from the river Aciravati. 

Namappayoge’ pi tam karakam apadanasafifiam hoti. 

When used in contexts of certain nouns, that noun can also be named an 

apadana. [This is the most common type of apadana] 

Tarh yatha? 

(1) * urasmà-from chest (womb). jàto-(was) born. putto-the son. 

i.e. The son was born from chest (i.e. womb). 

(2) * bhümito-from earth. niggato-came out. raso-the taste (of fruit 
etc.). i.e. The taste came out from the earth. 

(3) * ubhato-from both sides. sujato-well-bred, well-born. putto- 
son. * matito-from mother. ca-also. * pitito ca-from father's side 
also. i.e. also from mother's side, also from father's side, from both 
sides, the son was well-bred, well-born. 

Here are three example words: 

e ubhato, ° matito ° pitito which are affixed with an indeclinable af- 
fix “to”. [See Sutta 248. This affix has an ablative sense.] 


Upasaggayoge tam karakam apadanasafifiam hoti. 
When a word is used in the context of some Upasagga words, that 
word can also be an apadana. 

Tam yatha? 

(1) apa-by skirting. * salaya-from the rest house. àyanti-come. 
vanija-the traders. i.e. The traders come by skirting (avoiding) from 
the rest-house. [apa=taking off, by avoiding] 

(2) a-till, up to. * brahmaloka-the high heavens of Brahma. saddo- 
the sound. abbhuggacchati-rises up. 

i.e. The sound (of applause) rises up to the high heavens of Brahma. 

(3) upari-above. * pabbata-the mountain. devo-the rain. vassati- 
pours. i.e. The rain pours above the mountain. 

(4) * Buddhasma-from Buddha. pati-on behalf of, representing. 
Sariputto-Venerable Sariputta. dhammadesanaya-for the pur- 
pose of teaching Dhamma. bhikkhü-monks. alapati-addresses. 
temasarh-for three months. i.e. representing (from) Buddha, Vener- 


able Sariputta addresses the monks in order to teach Dhamma for 
three months. 


376 


Karaka Kappa 


(5) ghata' massa * telasma pati dadati. 
[ghata’massa=ghatarh+assa] ghatam-ghee. assa-to that person. 
e telasmà-from sesame oil. pati-instead of. dadati-(he) gives. 
i.e. He gives him ghee instead of sesame oil. 

(6) uppala' massa * padumasma pati dadati. uppalarh-white 
lotus. assa-to that person. * padumasma-from red lotus. pati- 


instead of. dadati-(he) gives. i.e. He gives him white lotus instead of 
red lotus. 


(7) kanaka'massa ° hirafifiasma pati dadati. kanakarh-gold. 
assa-to that person. * hirafifiasma-from silver. pati-instead of. 
dadati-(he) gives. i.e. He gives him gold instead of silver. 
Adiggahanena karakamajjhe’ pi paficami-vibhatti hoti. 
By the word “adi” in the Sutta, paficami vibhatti can be 
applied in the midst of Karaka (sentence parts). 

Note: This word “adi” comes from “upasaggayoga’ disva’pi ca” in 
Sutta. See "adi" is shown in bold. 
Examples: 

(1) ito-(starting) from this day. ® pakkhasma-from a pakkha of 15 

days. vijjhati-shoots. migarh-deer. luddako-the hunter. Here, 


a? 


apadana word “« pakkhasma" is between “Ito” and *migam", two 
Karakas of ablative and accusative cases. i.e. Starting from today 
within 15 days, the hunter (1s going to) shoot the deer and other 
games (in the forest). 


(2) * kosà-from a distance of a Kosa. vijjhati-(he) shoots. kufija- 


ram-the elephant. i.e. (He) shoots the elephant from (a distant of) a 
kosa. 


(3) * masasma-from a period of a month. bhufjati-(he) eats. bho- 
janam-food. i.e. (He) eats food from (since) a month. 
Apiggahanena nipatapayoge’ pi paficami-vibhatti hoti 
dutiya ca tatiya ca. 

By the upasagga word “api” in Sutta, in addition to 
paficami vibhatti, dutiya (accusative case) and tatiya (in- 


strumental case) can also be applied for apadana expres- 
sion when used in context of certain nipata words. 


377 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


Note: This word “api” comes from “upasaggayoga’ disva’ pi ca” in 
Sutta. The “api” is shown in bold. 

(1) rahita-(xfear) except/abandoning. ° matuja-from son. pufifiam- 
meritorious deed. katva-having done. danam-alms. deti-(he) 
gives. 

i.e. Having done meritorious deed without son, he gives alms. 

Note: Usually majority of apadana words are in ablative case 
(paficami vibhatti). However, as an exception, in the following 
examples, accusative (dutiya) and instrumental (tatiya) cases 
are also applied. Please carefully note such words shown un- 
derlined below. 

rahita-Except, leaving or deserting. ° matujarh-the son, i.e. Leav- 
ing son or without son. rahita ° matujena-with the son. và. 

Note: Though being translated in instrumental case, it does not mean 
“with the son” but without son. [rahita-means without, except] 

(2) rite (s&a)-except. ० saddhamma-noble way of Dhamma. kuto- 
where. sukharh-happiness. labhati-(one can) get. i.e. Where (one) 
can get happiness without (except) the noble way of Dhamma? 
rite ° saddhammarh, [Here apadana word is in accusative case] 
rite ० saddhammena Va. [Here apadana word is in instrumental 
case, with the same meaning, but in different case-ending] 

(3) te-those. bhikkhü-monks. nanà-leaving or deserting. ° kula- 
from families or nana kula-from various families and homes (two 
words together). pabbajità-came forth, (become) monks. i.e. Those 
monks (become) monks (after) leaving (various) families. 

(4) vina-except. * saddhamma-from noble Dhamma. natthafifio 
[natthafifio-natthi*afiio] natthi-no. afifio-other. koci-else, some- 
thing. natho-refuge/help. loke-in the world. vijjati-is. i.e. There is 
no other refuge/help in the world except the noble way of Dhamma. 








Vina ° saddhammarh, vina ® saddhammena va. 

Vina * Buddhasma-from Buddha. vina ° Buddharh vina 
* Buddhena va. [Meaning is easy to understand] 
Caggahanena afifattha’ pi paficami-vibhatti hoti. 


By means of the word “ca”, paficamt vibhatti can also be 
applied after various sabbanama nouns. 
Note: This word “ca” comes from “upasaggayoga’disva’pi ca" in Sutta. 


378 


Karaka Kappa 


See "ca" is shown in bold. 

e yato' ham bhagini ariyaya jatiya jato. [yato’harh=yatotaharh] 
yato-since the time when. aharh-I. bhagini-sister. ariyaya-by no- 
ble. jatiya-birth. jato-(was) born. i.e. Sister, since I was born the no- 
ble birth (by being enlightened). 

e yato-since. sarami-(I) remember. attanarh-oneself. 

i.e. Since or as far as I remember myself. 

e yato patto'smi vififiutam. [patto’smi=pattotasmi] 

yato-since. patto-the one who attained. asmi-I am. vififiutam-to a 
state of being mature, wise. i.e. Since I reach a state of being wise (ca- 
pable of knowing right and wrong, mature adulthood). 

e yatva' dhikarana'menam cakkhu'ndriyam asamvutam vi- 
harantam abhijjha, domanassa papaka akusala dhamma 
anva’saveyyum. 

[Trans] yato adhikaranam-For the reason which. enarh-to that (per- 
son). cakkhundriyarh-[cakkhutindriyarh] the faculty of eye. 
asamvutam-without restraining. viharantam-(to the one who is) liv- 
ing. abhijjha, domanassa-desire and aversion etc. papaka-those 
which are bad. akusala-unwholesome. dhamma-mental states. 
anva’saveyyurh-may repeatedly arise. i.e. For (such a) reason of 
(casually) living without restraining one's eye, bad, unwholesome men- 
tal states (such as) desire, and aversion etc., may repeatedly arise to (the 
mind of) that person. 

[yatva’ dhikarana’ menam-yato--adhikaranarm-reason-enarmj] 
[anva’saveyyum=anu-repeatedly, again and againt+asaveyyum-may 
flow, increase. 4-intensifier\+su-to flow+eyyurh] 


२७३, ३१०. रक्खणत्थान मिच्छितं 
273, 310. Rakkhana’tthana’micchitam. 
[Rakkhana-atthanamticchitarh. 2 words] 

[V] Rakkhanatthanam dhatünam payoge yam icchitarh, 
tam karakam apadanasafifarh hoti. 
When used in the context of verbs with the root meaning 
“to protect or prevent from", that noun (the object for which 
the protection is desired) can also be regarded as an 
"apadana". 


379 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


[See the examples. It is clear that the object for whom the protection 15 
desired becomes an apadana. Hence, that object is in ablative case.] 


(1) kake-crows. rakkhanti-(people) prevent. ० tandula-from 
(snatching) rice. i.e. People prevent crows from (eating) the rice. 

(2) * yavà-from (eating) barley. patisedhenti-(people) prevent. 
gavo-the cattle. i.e. People prevent cattle from (eating) the barley. 


२७४, 322. येन वा दस्सनं 

274, 311. Yena va’dassanam. [Yena+vatadassanar. 3 words] 

[V] Yena va adassana’micchitarh, tam karakam apadanasafinam 
hoti. 


When one wishes not to be seen by someone, that person 
from which one wants to hide, can also be an *apadana". 


(1) * upajjhaya-from preceptor (teacher). antaradhayati-hides. 
SISSO-the pupil. i.e. The pupil hides from the preceptor. 

(2) * matara ca-from mother also. * pitara ca-from father also. 
antaradhayati-hides. putto-son. i.e. The son hides from mother 
and father also. 

Va'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “va” for? 

Sattamivibhatyattham. 

It has some benefit for applying sattami vibhatti (locative 
case) in some instances where disappearance is mentioned. 
(as in the example shown below). 

* jetavane-at Jetavana temple. antaradhayati-disappears. bha- 
gava-Buddha. i.e. Lord Buddha disappears at Jetavana temple. 


380 


Karaka Kappa 


२७५, ३१२.दूरन्तिकद्धकाल निम्मान त्वालोप दिसायोग विभत्तारप्पयोग 
सुद्धप्पमोचन हेतु विवित्तप्पमाण पुब्बयोग बन्धन गुणवचन पञ्ह 
कथन थोकाक त्तूसु च 

275, 312. Dura’ntika’ddhakala, nimmana, tvalopa, 
disayoga, vibhatta’rappayoga, suddha’ 
ppamocana, hetu, vivitta’ppamana, pub- 
bayoga, bandhana, guna-vacana, panha, 
kathana, thoka’kattusu ca. 
[Düra, antika, addha, kala-nimmana, tvalopa, disayoga, 
vibhatti, ara-payoga, suddha, pamocana, hetu, vivitta, pamana, 
pubbayoga, bandhana, guna-vacana, paiiha, kathana, thoka, 
akattusu+ca. 2 words only in this great Sutta] 

[V] Düratthe, antikatthe, addhanimmane, kalanimmane, 
tvalope, disayoge, vibhatte, arappayoge, suddhe, pamocane, 
hetva’tthe, vivitta’tthe, pamane, pubbayoge, bandhana'tthe, 
gunavacane, patihe, kathane, thoke, akattari ca icce’te svat- 
thesu, payogesu ca, tam karakarh apadanasaiifiar hoti. 


It can also be named an *Apadaàna" in many instances of 
expressions when (words expressive of Apadana are) 
used in the context of the following: 

[1] the word “dura” which means “distant and far" or any 
word synonymous with it, 

[2] the word “antika”, which means “near” or any synony- 
mous word, 

[3] in expressing measurement of distance, 

[4] in expressing measurement of time, 

[5] when used in the accusative and locative sense, without 
using a tva-affixed Kita verb but the verb's implied 
meaning still evident in the sentence, 

[6] when referring to direction between one location and 
other locations, 

[7] when making an analytical comparison to highlight dis- 
tinctive quality of superiority or seniority, 


381 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


[8] when expressing abstinence using the words such as 
"arati" or any synonymous word, 

[9] when expressing purity and the state of being unadulter- 
ated, 

[10] when expressing release and freedom, 

[11] when expressing reason, 

[12] when expressing dissociation or being free from, 

[13] when expressing measurement, 

[14] when used in context of the word “pubba” which means 
“before, prior to", 

[15] when expressing of getting arrested, 

[16] when expressing the result and benefit of a virtue, 

[17] when questioning, 

[18] When answering, 

[19] when used in the context of the words meaning “a little, 
a small amount" 

[20] when used in expressions with the sense of non-agent 
but the implied meaning of reason and result are more 
evident, i.e. reason-descriptive nouns which assumes the 
role of apadana. 


dura’tthe tava-First, (here are the examples of apadana) where the 
word dūra (meaning “far’’) is used in the context: 

(1) ktva-how much. düro-(it is) far. ® ito-from here. 
nalakaragamo-bamboo-crafter's village? 
i.e. How far is from here to bamboo-crafter's village? 

(2) * dtrato’va’gamma 
[dürato'va' gamma=diratotevatagamma| 
dürato eva-from afar only. agamma-having come. 
i.e. having come from a distant only. 


Below are the examples of apadana where the word “āraka”, syn- 
onymous with düra, is used in the context: 

(1) araka-are far. te-those. moghapurisa-empty men. 

e imasma-from this. ० dhammavinaya-teaching of Buddha. 
i.e. Those “empty men" are far from this noble teaching of Buddha. 
Note: The term “empty men-moghapurisa" is used by Lord 


382 


Karaka Kappa 


Buddha when censuring someone for any improper action. 
Dutiya ca, tatiya ca 
dutiya (accusative) and tatiya (instrumental) cases can also be 
applied in the apadana-expression words. For example: 

(1) * duram ® gamam-from distant village. agato-come. [Here, it is 
in dutiyà, accusative case] 

(2) * dürena ® gamena-from distant village. VA-as another example. 
agato-come. [Here, apadana word is in tatitiya, instrumental case] 

(3) araka-far. ° imam ® dhammavinayarh-from this Buddha’s tea- 
ching. [Here in dutiya, accusative case] 

(4) * anena * dhammavinayena và [Here is in tatiya, instrumental 
case] icce’va’madi [ititevarn+Adi]-and so on. 


Antika’ tthe—(Here is the example of apadana) where the word anti- 
ka (meaning "near") is used in the context: 
(1) antikam-(is) near * gama-from village. 


ea 


Below are the examples of apadana where the two words *asanna, 
samipa" synonymous with antika are used: 


(1) asannam-(is) near * gama, [Meaning the same] 
(2) samipam * gama, 
(3) samipam ® saddhamma-from noble Dhamma. 


Dutiyà ca, tatiya ca. dutiyà and tatiya cases can also be applied in 
apadana. Examples in the context of the word “antika” 

(1) antikam ® gamarm, [dutiya case] 

(2) antikam ® gamena va. [tatiya case] 

Examples with the word *asanna" 

(1) asannam ® gamam, [dutiya case] 

(2) asannam * gamena va. [tatiya case] 
Examples in the context of the word “samipa” 

(1) samipam ° gamam. [dutiya case] 

(2) samipam ° gamena va. [tatiya case] 

(3) samipam ० saddhammam, [dutiya case] 

(4) samipam ० saddhammena va [tatiya case] 

icce’va’madi. 


383 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


Addhanimmane—(Here is the example of apadana) where the 

measure of geographic distance is expressed: 

(1) * ito-from here. ° mathuraya-from city of Mathura. catüsu- 
four. yojanesu-at “yojana”. sankassam nàma-named “sankas- 
sa". nagararh-city. atthi-there is. tattha-there, at that city. 
bahü-many. jana-people. vasanti-live. i.e. At four “yojana dis- 
tance" from this city of Mathura, there is a city named “sankassa”. 
Many people live there. 

[addha-the distance nimmana-measure] 
icce'va'madi. 

Note: A yojana is about four kosa (about 8 miles) distant. 

Kalanimmane—(Here are the examples of apadana) where the 

measure of time is expressed: 

(1) * ito-from now. bhikkhave-monks! ekanavutikappe-at a time 
of 91 eons. vipassi nama-named Vipassi. bhagava-Buddha. 
loke-in the world. udapadi-appeared. i.e. Monks! at a time of 91 
eons from now, the Buddha named *Vipassr", appeared in the 
world. 

(2) * ito-from now. tinnam-of three. masanam-months. accayena- 
on passing (instrumental case in the locative sense. See Sutta 290). 
parinibbayissati-(the Buddha) will expire. 

i.e. On passing of three months from now, the Buddha will enter into 
parinibbana. 
icce’va’madi. 

Tvalope kamma’ dhikaranesu— 

[tva-tva-affixed Kita-verb--lope-elided, deleted. i.e. absent, not seen] 
(Here are the examples of apadana) where tva-affixed gerund-verb 
is absent but the implied meaning thereof is evident and in the sense 
of accusative and locative. 

There are four set of examples. In the first of each, there is no tva- 
affixed gerund-verb. The meaning is implicit while in the second 
one it is explicit as there is a tva-affixed gerund-verb being present. 

(1) (a) * pasada-from mansion or palace. Sahkameyya-(he should) 

move. i.e. He should move from mansion. The meaning that he 
has been already on the mansion by going up there is implicit as 
there is no tva-affixed gerund-verb. 

(b) * pasadarh-to the mansion or palace. abhiruhitva-going 
up. Và-in other words. [This is an example of Kamma, accusative, 


384 


Karaka Kappa 


not apadana example] 
Here, tva-affixed gerund-verb is already present. So, it is explicit. 
But this is not an apadana example. 
(2) (a) * pabbata-from mountain. sahkameyya. 
i.e. He should move from mountain. 
(b) * pabbatam abhiruhitva va. [Similar to “pasadarh ab- 
hiruhitva’’] [an example of Kamma, not apadana] 
(3) (a) * hatthikkhandha-from the back of elephant. sahkameyya. 
i.e. He should move from back of the elephant. 
(b) * hatthikkhandham abhiruhitva va. [an example of 
Kamma, not apadana] 
(4) (a) * Asana-from seat. vutthaheyya-(he) should get up. 
i.e. He should get up from seat. 
(b) *asane-in the seat. nisiditva-having seated. va. 
[an example of okasa-locative, not apadana] 
icce' va' madi. 
Disayoge-(The examples of apadana) where words indicative of di- 
rection and physical points are used in the context: 
(1) * avicito-from lowest hell. yava-up to. upari bhavaggaman- 
tare-in between the highest heaven. 
[upari bhavagga'mantare- upari-above, bhava’gga-the highest 
heaven+antare-in between] 
bahü-many diverse. sattanikaya-groups of living beings. 
vasanti-live. i.e. many diverse groups of beings live in between 
from the lowest hell (underneath) to the highest heaven above. 
(2) ° yato-where. khemam-(it is) safe. * tato-there. bhayam-(it is) 
unsafe. i.e. Where (it used to be) safe (before), is no longer safe. 
(3) * puratthimato-from the East, * dakkhinato-from the South, 
e pacchimato-from the West, ® uttarato-from the North. aggi- 
the fires. pajjalanti-are aflame. 
(4) * yato-since. assosum-(they) heard. bhagavantam-the Buddha. 
i.e. Since they heard Buddha's (words). 
(5) uddhath-above. * padatalà-from the feet. adho-down below. 
e kesamatthaka-till the tip of hairs. 
i.e. From the feet up till the tip of hairs and down below (to the feet) 
icce'va'madi. 
Vibhatte-(The examples of apadana) where the words indicative of 


385 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


comparison to highlight a distinction are used in the context: 

(1) * yato-from which. panitataro va-either the best. visitthataro 
va-or the most outstanding thing. na’tthi-there is no. [natthi=na- 
not-*atthi-is] i.e. From this Dhamma, there is nothing else which is 
either the best or more outstanding (than the Dhamma). 

(2) Chatthi ca-chattht (genitive) case is also applicable for apadana. 
e.g. * channavutinam-of ninety-six. ® pasandanam-impious. 
dhammanarh-ideas. pavaram-(is) the most excellent. 
yadidarh- that which is. sugatavinayo-the discipline of Buddha. 
i.e. Of the ninety-six impious ideas, the discipline (teaching) of 
Buddha is the most excellent. 
icce'va'madi. 

Arappayoge-(The examples of apadana) where the words of absti- 

nence are used in the context: 

(1) * gamadhamma-from the way of villagers. ० vasaladhamma- 
from impious way. * asaddhamma-from ignoble way. arati- 
(mentally) abstinence. virati-(physically) abstinence. pativirati- 
sustained abstinence. 

(2) ° panatipata-from killing. veramani-abstinence. 
icce'va'madi. 

Suddhe-(The examples of apadana) where words indicative of the 

purity, are used in the context: 

(1) * lobhaniyehi-from greed-causing. ° dhammehi-phenomenon. 
suddho-(is) pure. asamsattho-(is) dissociated. 

i.e. It is pure and dissociated from greed-causing phenomenon. 

(2) * matito ca-from mother's side also. * pitito ca-from father’s 
side also. suddho-(is) pure. asarhsattho-(is) not mixed (with oth- 
er castes). anu'pakuddho-(is) not censured. agarahito-(is) not 
reproached. i.e. (He) is not to be censured nor to be reproached as he 
is pure and not racially mixed either from the mother’s side or from 
the father’s side. 
icce’va’madi. 


386 


Karaka Kappa 


Pamocane-(The examples of apadana) where words indicative of 
freedom and release are used: 
(1) parimutto-is free. ० dukkhasma’ti [dukkhasma-iti] 
e dukkhasma-from suffering. iti-as. vadami-(I) say. 
i.e. I say that it is freedom from suffering. 
(2) mutto'smi [mutto'smi-mutto--asmi] mutto-free. asmi-(I) am. 
e marabandhana-from the snares of the devil. 
i.e. I am free from the snares of the devil. 
(3) na-not. te-they. muccanti-are free. ० maccuna-from death. 
i.e. They are not being free from death. 
icce'va'madi. 
Hetva’tthe—(The examples of apadana) where the word indicative of 
the reason is used in the context: 
(1) ° kasma ® hetuna-for what reason, why? (ablative case example) 
(2) ° kena ® hetuna-for what reason? (instrumental case example) 
(3) * kissa ® hetuna-for what reason? (genitive case example) 
Note: See these examples from 1 to 3 in three different cases after the 
interrogative Sabbanama word “kim”. This clearly shows a grammati- 


cal rule where an example word indicative of “reason” has to be in one 
of these three cases. 


(4) ° kasmà-why. nu-is a nipdta particle which signifies a question 
and similar to such a question mark *?". tumham-of you, among 
you. dahara-the young ones. na miyare-do not die. i.e. Why the 
young ones among you (in the family) do not die young? 

(5) * kasma-why. idhe'va [idhe’va=idha+eva] idha-here. eva-only. 
maranarh-death. bhavissati-will be. i.e. Why my death will be 
only here? 
icce' va madi. 

Vivitta’tthe— (Here are the examples of apadana) where words 

indicative of dissociation is used in the context: 

(1) vivitto-is dissociated, being detached from. ० papaka- 
unwholesome. ° dhamma-mental state. 

i.e. Being detached from unwholesome mental state. 

(2) vivicce'va [vivicce’va=viviccateva] Vivicca-being detached. 
eva-only. * kamehi-from sensual pleasures. vivicca-being de- 
tached. 


387 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


* akusalehi-unwholesome. ० dhammehi-mental states. i.e. Being 

detached from sensual pleasure and unwholesome mental states. 

icce'va'madi. 

Pamane—(The examples of apadana) where the words indicative of 

measurement is used: 

(1) * dighaso-by length. navavidatthiyo-a measure of nine “vidat- 
thi". 
sugatavidatthiya-by measure of Buddha’s vidatthi. pamanika- 
measurement. karetabba-should be made measured. majjhimas- 
sa-of medium height. purisassa-of man. addha-telasahattha- 
half of thirteen feet. i.e. By measure of Buddha’s vidatthi measure- 
ment, nine vidatthi in length, half-thirteen feet by measure of a me- 
dium height man are to be measured. 

Note: A vidatthi is a length of measure of the distance between the ex- 

tended thumb and the little finger while both are being stretched out. 


icce'va'madi. 

Pubbayoge-(The example of apadana) where the word *pubba" is 

used in the context. 

(1) pubbe'va [pubbe’va=pubbeteva] pubbe-before, previously. 
eva-only. ० sambodha-from (the time of) enlightenment. i.e. at 
the previous time from enlightenment, (prior to enlightenment). 
icce'va'madi. 

Bandhana'tthe-(Here are the example of apadana) where the word 
meaning “to arrest" is used in the context. 

(1) ° satasm4-for (from the reason of) a hundred. bandho-arrested. 
naro-man. i.e. Man got arrested for a hundred. 

Tatiyà ca- tatiyà (instrumental) case can also be applied. e.g. 

(2) ° satena-by a hundred. bandho naro rafifia-by king. 

* inatthena-by reason of debt. i.e. Man was arrested by king for 
reasons of (unpaid) debt of a hundred. 
icce’va’madi. 


388 


Karaka Kappa 


Gunavacane-(The examples of apadana) when extolling the result 
or benefit of a virtue or a specific quality. 

(1) * pufifiaya-by meritorious deed. sugatim-to good destiny (re- 
birth). yanti-(people) go. i.e. People go to a good (destiny of) re- 
birth by virtue of meritorious deed. 

(2) ° cagaya-by alms. vipularh-is abundant. dhanam-wealth. 

i.e. abundance of wealth is by virtue of alms. 

(3) * pafifiaya-by wisdom. vimutti-is free. mano-the mind. 
i.e. The mind is free by virtue of wisdom. 

(4) * issariyaya-by authority. janam-people. rakkhati-protects or 
governs. raja-the king. i.e. The king governs people by virtue of au- 
thority. 
icce’va’madi. 

Paühe tvalope kamma’ dhikaranesu—(Here are the examples of 
apadana) in case of questioning used together without a tva-gerund 
Kita verb, in the sense of accusative and locative. 

(1) * abhidhamma-from abhidhamma. pucchanti-(they) ask. 


[a tva-affixed Kita-verb is absent in this example] 
i.e. They ask question from (i.e. regarding) Abhidhamma. 
* abhidhammam sutva-having listened. [This is a tva-affixed 
Kita-verb] i.e. Having listened to Abhidhamma, they ask question. 
* abhidhamme thatva-standing (there as point of question) va. 
[a tva-affixed Kita-verb is present] i.e. Standing on Abhidhamma, 
they ask question. 

(2) * vinaya-from vinaya. pucchanti, [a tva-affixed Kita verb is 
absent] 
* vinayam sutva, * vinaye thatva va. [a tva-affixed Kita-verb 

is present] 


Dutiya ca tatiya ca-dutiya case and tatiya cases are also applied. 
e.g. 

(1) * abhidhammam, * abhidhammena va. 

(2) * vinayarh, * vinayena va. 


Evam-similarly in this way. ° sutta-from Sutta. ® geyya-from stan- 
za. ० gathaya-from verse. ° veyyakarana-from explanatory non- 
stanza discourses. * udana-from joyous utterances. * itivuttaka-from 


389 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


itivuttaka (re-narrated) discourses. * jataka-from Buddha's former life 

stories. ० abbhutadhamma-from inspirational discourses. 

* vedalla-from joyous sayings. 

icce'va'madi. 

Kathane tvalope kamma' dhikaranesu-(the examples of 

apadana) in regards of answering without a tva-affixed Kita-verb, in the 

sense of accusative and locative. 

(1) * abhidhamma kathayanti-(they) answer. [a tva-affixed Kita- 
verb is absent here] i.e. They answer question from (regarding) Ab- 
hidhamma. 

* abhidhammarh sutva. 

i.e. Having listened to Abhidhamma, they answer question. 

* abhidhamme thatva va. [a tva-affixed Kita-verb is present 
here] 

i.e. Standing on Abhidhamma, they answer question. 

(2) * vinaya kathayanti. [a tva-affixed Kita-verb is absent] 

* vinayam sutva, * vinaye thatva va. [a tva-affixed Kita-verb 
is present] 


Dutiya ca tatiya ca- dutiya case and tatiya cases can also be 

applied for apadana word. (See the examples) 

(1) * abhidhammam, * abhidhammena va. 

(2) ° vinayam, ® vinayena va. 

Evar ° sutta, * geyya, * gathaya, ° veyyakarana, ° udana, 

e itivuttaka, * jataka, ° abbhutadhamma, ° vedalla. 

icce'va'madi. 

Thoke—(the examples of apadana) in the context of the words mean- 

ing “a little, a meagre amount". 

(1) * thoka-from reasons of little (excuse). muccanti-(they) are free 
(from confinement). i.e. They are free by means of a little excuse. 

(2) * appamattaka-from little amount. muccanti. 

(3) * kicchà-from being weary. muccanti. 


Tatiya ca-tatiya case can also be applied in apadana word. 
e.g. * thokena-by little. * appamattakena, * kicchena và 
icce’va’madi. 


390 


Karaka Kappa 


Akattari ca-(the examples of apadana) where non-agent words 

indicative of obvious reason, is an apadana. 

(1) kammassa-of (good) kamma. * katatta-for having done. 
e upacitatta-for having collected. ® ussannattà-for having accu- 
mulated. ® vipulatta-for having increased. cakkhuvififianam- 
the eye-consciousness. uppannarh-act of arising. hoti-is. 
i.e. for reasons of having done, for having collected, for having ac- 
cumulated, for having increased the (good) Kamma, the eye- 
consciousness arises. 


icce’va’madi. 

Caggahanena sesesu’pi ye maya no’padittha apadana- 
payogika, te payogavicakkhanehi yathayogam yojetabba. 
By means of “ca” (included in this Sutta), the remaining 
instances and expressions of apadana which are not ex- 
plained by me, should also be applied by those skilled in 
the knowledge of grammatical examples wherever pos- 
sible and applicable. (Refer to the last word “ca” in Sutta) 


२७६, ३०२. यस्स दातुकामो रोचते धारयते वा d सम्पदानं 
276, 302. Yassa datukamo rocate dharayate va tam 
sampadanam. 
[Yassa+datukamo+rocate+dharayate+va+tarn+sampadanam. 7 
words | 
[V] Yassa va datukamo, yassa va rocate, yassa va dharayate, 
tam karakarh sampadanasafifiam hoti. 


To whom one wishes to give something, to whom some- 
thing adorns, or to whom one carries something for, such 
instances of expressions are called a “sampadana-the recipi- 


११ 


ent . 


(1) * samanassa-of (to) the monk. civaram-the robe. dadati-(He) 
offers. i.e. He offers the robe to the monk. [Here, the monk is re- 
ceiver. So, it has to be in dative case, thus signifying Sampadana] 

(2) * samanassa-of the monk. rocate-adorns. saccam-truth. i.e. The 
truth adorns the monk. [Here, truth adorns the monk. So, the monk 
has to be in dative case] 


391 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


(3) * devadattassa-of (for) Devadatta. suvannacchattarh-golden 
umbrella. dharayate-carries. yafifiadatto-Y afifiadatta. 
i.e. Yaiifiadatta carries the golden-umbrella for (shielding) Devadat- 
ta. 
[Here, Yafiriadatta carries the umbrella for Devadatta's protection. 
So, Devadatta has to be in dative case as he is the recipient] 
Sampadana’micca’ne’na kvattho? Sampadane catutthr. 
What is the benefit by terming *sampadana"? 
It has the benefit of ease of reference in such Suttas as: 


-95 


"Sampadane catuttht” etc. 


Va’ti vikappana'ttham. 

Dhatunamanarh payoge và upasaggappayoge va nipata- 
ppayoge và sati atthavikappanattham va’ti padam payujjati. 
The word “vā” is included in Sutta to allow other instances 
of sampadana (rather than those examples shown here) ap- 
plicable in context of certain roots, or nouns, or upasagga 


words, or nipdata particles and wherever applicable. 


392 


२७७, 303. 


277, 303. 


Karaka Kappa 


सिलाघ हनु ठा सप धार पिह कुधदुहिस्सोस्सूय राधिक्खपच्चासुण 
अनुपतिगिण पुब्बकत्तारोचनत्थ तदत्थ तुमत्थालमत्थ मञ्ञा 
नादरप्पाणिनि गत्यत्थकम्मनि आसीसत्थसम्मुति भिय्य 
सत्तम्यत्येसु च 

Silagha, hanu, tha, sapa, dhara, piha, 
kudha, duhiss’osuya, radh'ikkha, pac- 
ca'suna, anupatigina, pubbakatta’ roca- 
na'ttha, ta’dattha, tumattha’lamattha, 
manna’nadara’ ppanini, 
gatya'tthakammani, asisattha, sammuti, 
bhiyya, sattamya'tthesu ca. 

[Silagha, hanu, tha, sapa, dhara, piha, kudha, duha, issa, usüya, 
radha, ikkha, pativ avsuna, anuVpativ gina, pubbakattu, aroca- 
na-attha, ta’dattha, tumattha, alam-attha, mafifia, anadara, 
apaninitgati-atthakammani+asisattha, sammuti, bhiyya, 


sattami-atthesu+ca. 4 words. Only four words in this long 
Sutta] 


[V] Silagha, hanu, tha, sapa, dhara, piha, kudha, duha, issa- 
icce'tesam dhatünam payoge, usiiya’tthanafi’ca payoge, 
radha, ikkhappa-yoge, pacca'suna-anupatiginanam pubba- 
kattari, arocana’tthe, ta' datthe, tuma'tthe, alama’tthe, 
mafinati’ ppayoge, ana’dare, a’ppanini, gatya'tthanam 
dhatünam kammani, asisa'tthe ca, sammuti, bhiyya, satta- 
mya'tthesu ca tam karakam sampadanasafitiam hoti. 


There are also many instances of expressions where it 
can be named as *"sampadaàna" when used in conjunc- 
tion with the following: 

[1] When used in the context of verbs with roots “silagha, 
hanu, tha, sapa, dhara, piha, kudha, duha, issa, 
usüya, radha, ikkha, the root “su” prefixed with pati 
and à upasaggas, the root “ge” prefixed with anu and 
pati upassaga where preceding subject of the sentence 
assumes the position of *sampadana" later on, the root 


393 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 
“ruca” prefixed with an “a” upsagga which means “to 
tell” and other verbal roots of similar meaning, 

[2] also, when expressing a purpose in the context of the 
word “attha” or nouns in dative case with a morpheme 
"aya", expressive of a “to-infinitive purpose” similar to 
“tum-suffixed Kita verbs", 

[3] when used in the context of the nipata word alam" 
which has the meanings of worthiness and rejection, 

[4] when expressing disrespect and sneering at someone as 
a lifeless stuff in a contemptuous manner used in the 
context of the verbal word “mafifie-I think", having the 
root *mana-to consider", 

[5] when using a dative-case noun in the accusative sense of 
“to” in the context of verbs based in roots having the 
meaning of “gati-to move, to go" (that noun itself be- 
comes a sampadana), 

[6] when expressing *asisa" (wishing well-being for some- 
one), 

[7] when used in context of the words “sammuti (recogni- 
tion), bhiyya (being in excess of or beyond measure)", 

[8] when used in the context of locative-sense words. 


Silaghappayoge tava—First, (here are examples of sampadàna) in 

the context of verb with the root “silagha-to praise" 

(1) * buddhassa-of the Buddha (to the Buddha). silaghate-(he) 
praises. i.e. He praises the Buddha. 

(2) * dhammassa-of Dhamma. silaghate-(he) praises. i.e. He prais- 
es the Dhamma. 

(3) * sanghassa-of Sangha. silaghate-(he) praises. i.e. He praises the 
Sangha. 

(4) sakarh-one’s own. * upajjhayassa-of preceptor. silaghate-(he) 
praises, i.e. He praises his own preceptor. 

(5) * tava-you. silaghate-(he) praises. i.e. He praises you. 

(6) * mama-me. silaghate-(he) praises. i.e. He praises me. 
icce' va' madi. and so on. 

Note: Here, Sampadana word in dative case is like that of accusative 

case having the meaning “to”. 


394 


Karaka Kappa 


Hanu'ppayoge- Examples of Sampadana used in context of verb 

with the root *hanu-to destroy or remove other's fault and shortcom- 

ings" : 

(1) hanute ® tuyha' meva, [tuyha'meva- tuyharh+eva] 
hanute-(he) removes, hides. tuyharh-your (faults). eva-only. 
i.e. He hides your faults only. 

(2) hanute ° mayha'meva [refer to the previous example for San- 
dhi] hanute-(he) removes, hides. mayham-my (faults). eva-only 
icce'va' madi. and so on. 


Tha-payoge—Examples of sampadana in context of verb with the 

root “tha-to stand" : 

(1) upatittheyya-(should) stand nearby (to wait on). * sakya- 
puttanarh-to the sons of Sakyas. vaddhaki-the carpenter. i.e. The 


carpenter should stand near (to attend) to the sons of Sakyas (i.e. 
monks). 


(2) ° bhikkhussa-of the monk. ® bhufijantassa-while eating. 
paniyena va-either by (passing) drinking-water. vidhüpanena 
va-or by fanning (to keep him cool). upatittheyya-(should) stand 
by (to attend to). bhikkhunt-female monk. i.e. The female monk 
should wait on the monk while eating by passing water or by fanning. 
icce’va’madi. 

Sapa-ppayoge- Examples of sampadana in the context of verb with 

the root “sapa-to curse, to swear" : 

(1) * tuyharh-your (to you). sapate-(he) curses. i.e. He curses you. 

(2) * mayharh-my (me). sapate. i.e. He curses me. 

icce'va'madi. 

Dhara-ppayoge— Examples of Sampadana in context of verb with 

the root “dhara-to carry”: 

(1) suvannarh-gold. * te-your. dharayate-(He) carries. 

i.e. (He, the debtor) carries your (the creditor's) gold. (It means that 
the debtor has to make repayment of gold to the creditor) 
icce’va’madi. 

Piha-ppayoge—Examples of sampadana in the context of verb with 

the root “piha-to adore”: 


395 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


Sometimes other roots with the similar meanings can also neces- 

sitate the expression of sampadana. See examples in 2 and 3. 

(a) In 2, the root “kamu-to like, to wish" is found in the Kita 
noun verb *dassanakama". [dassana-see*kama-want to] 

(b) In example 3, the root “isu-to wish" is used in the Akhydta 


verb “iechami”. 


(1) * Buddhassa-the Buddha. afifiatitthiya-those having other belief 
and philosophies, heretics. pihayanti-adore. 

i.e. Those having other belief and philosophies adore Buddha. 

(2) devà-the deities. dassanakama-want to see. ® te-you. 

i.e. The deities (celestial beings) want to see you. 

(3) yato-since. icchami-(I) prefer. ० bhaddantassa-venerable one. 
i.e. Since I prefer the Venerable one. 

(4) * samiddhanarh-wealthy persons. pihayanti-adore. dalidda- 
poor people. i.e. The poor adore the rich people. 
icce’va’madi. 

Kudha,duha,issa,usüya-ppayoge-Examples of the sampada- 

na in the context of verb with the root “kudha-to be angry, duha-to 

spoil, issa-to be envious of, usüya-to be jealous of". 

Kudha-root example: 

(1) kodhayati-(he) is angry. * devadattassa-at Devadatta. i.e. (He 
is) angry at Devadatta. 

(2) * tassa-to that king “Kalabu”. kujjha-(be) angry. mahavira-Oh 
respectable hermit of great effort. ma-do not. rattham-the king- 
dom. vinassa-destroy. idarh-this. i.e. Oh respectable hermit of 
great effort! Be angry at that king "Kalabu" (only). But, do not de- 
stroy this (whole) kingdom. 

Duha-root example: 

(1) duhayati-spoils, destroys. ० disanarh-directions. megho-rain. 
i.e. The rains effect (the pleasant atmosphere of the) directions (for 
those wanting the clear skies). 

Issa-root example: 

(1) titthiya-those having other views. * samananam-of the monks. 
issayanti-(are) envious. gunagiddhena-craving for fame. 

i.e. Craving for fame, those having other views, i.e. heretics, are 
envious of the monks. 

(2) titthiya ° samananam issayanti labhagiddhena-craving for 


396 


Karaka Kappa 


offerings. i.e. Craving material-offerings, those having other views, 
i.e. heretics, are envious of the monks. 
Usüya-root example: 
(1) dujjana-bad people. * gunavantanam-of those having dignity. 
usüyanti-are jealous. gunagiddhena-craving for dignity. 
i.e. Craving dignity, the bad guys are jealous of those with dignity. 
(2) kà-of what (benefit is there). usüyà-being jealous. ® viJanatam- 
of the wise. i.e. What benefit is there by being jealous of the wise! 
icce’va’madi. 
Radha, ikkha-icce’tesam dhatünam payoge—Examples of 
sampadana in the context of verbs with the root *radha-to accomplish, 
to be pleased (for verb in the first example), to injure (for verb in the 
second example). ikkha-to look at, to consider, to take into account”. 


Note: Besides this root, other root of the similar meaning is also applied 
in the first example. 


yassa akathitassa pucchanam kammavikkhyapanatthafi’ca, 

tam karakarh sampadanasafifiam hoti, dutiya ca. 

When asking a question to the one who is muted (re: the example Nos. 

3, 4) and specifically telling one’s emotions (kamma) to someone (re: 

example Nos. 1, 2), that person being silent, that someone being talked 

to, is called *sampadana". (In such cases,) dutiya (accusative) case is al- 

so applicable in addition to catutthi (dative) case. See the examples 

carefully to clarify this explanatory sentence shown above. 

radha-root example: 

(1) aradho' ham ° rafifío. [aradho’harh=aradho+aharn] aradho-(am 
pleased with). aharn-I. * rafifio-of the king. 

(2) aradho' ham ® rajanarh-to king. [Here, accusative case is used 
as sampadana, meaning the same] i.e. I am pleased with king. 

Note: “01 & to" are only the meanings reflective of the case. 

(3) एच ham * ayyanam aparajjhami. [kya’harh=kirh+aharh] 
kirn-What (wrong). aharh-do I. aparajjhami-offend, insult. 
e ayyanarm-to the venerables. i.e. What do I offend against the 
venerables? i.e. what wrong or insult I did to upset you? 

(4) kya" ham ° ayye aparajjhami. [Here, accusative plural case, is 
applied for sampadana, meaning the same, in place of dative case] 

Note: Both examples 3 & 4 are the types of usage and words said as a 
question of inquiry to the monks who remain silent without giving 
any polite response despite the repeated act of respectful greeting. 


397 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


ikkha-root example: 

(1) cakkhurh ® janassa dassanaya tam viya maññe. cakkhum 
viya-like the eye. ® janassa-of people. dassanaya-to see. tarn- 
that Venerable one. mafifie-I think or it seems like. i.e. It seems that 
for people to see that Venerable one is like their only sight (at this 
moment). 

(2) * ayasmato * upalitherassa upasampada’ pekkho upatisso. 
* ayasmato * upalitherassa-of Venerable Upali, upasampad- 
a’ pekkho-considering to get ordained. upatisso-(the monk-to-be, 
a postulant) Venerable Upatissa. 

i.e. The postulant Upatissa is considering (wanting) to get ordained 
(under the preceptorship) of Venerable Upali. 

Note: In this sentence, * ayasmato * upalitherassa are two words of 

sampadana in dative case. The word “ayasmato” is an adjective which 

modifies the next word. It equals to “Venerable”, a form of respectful 
term used to address those senior ones. Its original base-word is actually 

“ayasma”. It is a Taddhita noun with “mantu” affix which means “the 

one having long life”. See Sutta 371 for detail. 

(3) * ayasmantam va [sampadana in accusative case] 

icce’va’madi. 

Note: The word ** upalitheram" is omitted in this example. In this ex- 

ample, sampadana word “® ayasmantam" is in accusative case though 

the meaning is the same. The next word “° upalitherassa" of the first 
sentence has to be in accusative case too. So, it will be “* ayasmantam 

e upàlitheram". Thus making two sampadana words to complete the 

meaning. 


Pacca’suna anupatiginanam pubbakattari—Examples of 
sampadana in the context of verb with the root “su-to listen to, prefixed 
with pati and a", also the root “ge-to sing, prefixed with anu and pati 
upasaggas": 

sunotissa pacca’yoge yassa kammuno pubbassa yo katta, so 
sampadanasafino hoti. 

The subject of first object, which is related to a verb with the root “su-to 
listen to, prefixed with pati and a", is (to be herein) named a sampada- 
na. 

Tam yatha? For example, 


bhagava bhikkhü eta'davoca [eta’davoca=etarht+avoca] 
(an active voice sentence) 


398 


Karaka Kappa 


bhagava-the Lord Buddha. bhikkhü-monks. etarh-this word. 
avoca-said. i.e. Buddha said this discourse to the monks. 


Note: In the above sentence, there are two objects (Kammas). They are 
bhikkhü (the monks) and etarh (this word, i.e. discourse). 


Below is a grammatical explanation given by the great Grammarian 
Kaccayana regarding the preceding sentence. 

bhikkhü'ti-the word *Bhikkhü". akathita kammarm-is called 
akathita kamma (non-principal object). etan’ti-the word “etam”. 
kathitakammarh-is called kathita kamma (the principal object). 


Note: The student has to basically understand the nature of active and 
passive voice sentences in order to clearly understand “the principal and 
non-principal role of the subject and object which are determined accord- 
ing to the voice of a sentence. Please refer to The formative system of 
Pali Verbs" in Akhyata chapter, explained at the end of first section. 


Yassa kammuno pubbassa yo katta, so bhagava'ti *yo karoti 
sa katta" ti suttavacanena kattusafiiio. 


Of the two Kammas (objects), the word “bhagava” which is subject of 
the first Kamma (Re: Bhikkhü) is named Katta (doer, the one who does 
the action of saying the discourse to the monks) by the grammatical 
principle as stipulated by the Sutta “yo karoti sa katta". 


Evam yassa kammuno pubbassa yo katta, 
so sampadanasaniio hoti. 


Thus, the subject of the first Kamma (after changing its role as a Subject) 
is named a sampadana. i.e. it becomes a sampadana. 


Tam yatha? For example, 
Note: Below, there are two examples. 
In the first example, the verb is “paccassosum (patiVaVsututh) ". Here, 
the root “su” is prefixed with pati and 4. In the second, the verb is 
"asunanti (4Vsu+na-affixtanti) ". Here, the root word “su” is prefixed 
with an à. 
(1) te bhikkhü * bhagavato paccassosum. 

te-those. bhikkhü-monks. ० bhagavato-(to the word) of Buddha. 


paccassosurh-listened or responded in affirmative. 

i.e. Those monks listened (responded) to the Buddha. 
Note: In this sentence, the word *bhagava" in the first sentence 
becomes a Sampadana by changing its case into dative case as “bhaga 





399 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


vato" as it receives the respectful attention (i.e. response) of the listener 
monks. 
(2) Asunanti * buddhassa bhikkhü. 
asunanti-(attentively) listen. ० buddhassa-of Buddha (to the Bu- 
ddha). bhikkhü-monks. 
i.e. The monks (attentively) listened to the Buddha. 
Note: In this sentence, “Budhassa” is a synonymous with bhagavato. 


Explanation 

In the foregoing sentence “Bhagava bhikkhü eta'davoca", the word “Bha- 
gava" is Subject. In the latter two sentences above, * bhagavato and 
° Buddhassa are Sampadanas in dative case. Now, it can be clearly seen 
that the word *Bhagava", which had played the role of being a Subject in the 
first sentence, becomes a Sampadana in next sentence when used in the con- 
text of the verb “paccassosurh” and here, the root “su” is prefixed with pati 
and a. 

In the second sentence, the Sampadana word “Buddhassa” is a synonym of 
“Bhagavato” in the same case, playing the same grammatical role as a Sam- 
padana in the sentence used in the context of the verb "asunanti". Here the 
root word "su" is prefixed with “a”. 




















Ginassa anu,pati,yoge—Examples of Sampadana in the context of verb 
with the root “ge-to sing, prefixed with anu and pati upasaggas". 


yassa kammuno pubbassa yo katta, so sampadanasafino hoti. 
(Here too) the subject of the first Kamma word, is named Sampadana. 
Tam yatha? For example, 

bhikkhu janam dhammarh saveti. 

bhikkhu-monk. janarh-people. dhammam-Dhamma. saveti-causes it 
heard. i.e. The monk preaches dhamma to the devotees. [Causative sentence] 
Note: In this sentence, the word *Bhikkhu" played the role of Subject. In 
next sentences below, it will become a Sampadana word changing its case 


into dative as ^Bhikkhuno". Please note that the word “tassa” also is a Sam- 
padana as it serves as an adjective of “Bhikkhuno”. 





(1) * tassa * bhikkhuno-(to the word) of that monk. jano-people. anugi- 
nati-repeats after him. [anugiņāti-anuVge+ņā+ti] 
i.e. People repeat (say in chorus) after that preacher monk. 


400 


Karaka Kappa 


(2) ° tassa ® bhikkhuno jano patiginati-rejoins in unison giving him (to 
the monk) appreciative words of Sadhu. i.e. People rejoin (in unison, giv- 
ing) that monk appreciative words (such as saying Sadhu etc.). 
[patiginati-pati Vge--na-ti] 


Explanatory Stanza 


Yo vadeti sa ‘katta’ti, vuttam ‘kamman’ti vuccati. 
yo patiggahako tassa, sampadanam' vijaniya. 


The one who says, is to be known as Katta, the subject. 
That which is said, is called Kamma, the object. 

The receiver of that said word, should be formally 
known as “sampadana”. 

Icce' va'madi. and so on. 


Arocana’tthe— Examples of sampadana in the context of verb with certain 

roots meaning “to announce, to summon, to make it known, to speak": 
(1) arocayami-(I) say. ° vo-you. bhikkhave-Oh monks! 
i.e. Oh monks! (T) tell you. 

(2) amantayami-(I) call on. * vo bhikkhave. 
i.e. Oh monks! (T) call on you. 

(3) pativedayami (1) let it be known. * vo bhikkhave. 
i.e. Oh monks! (T) inform you. 

(4) arocayami ® te-you. maharaja-great king! i.e. I tell you great king! 

(5) amantayami ® te maharaja, i.e. (I) call on you great king! 

(6) pativedayami * te maharaja i.e. (I) inform you great king! 
icce’va’madi. 

Ta’datthe— Examples of sampadana as dative-case nouns expressive of 
“to-infinitive”. Here, the sampadana words are aya and ya-ending nouns. 
They are result-descriptive, formally called “ta’dattha” words. See all the 
examples carefully to clarify this grammatical concept of “ta’dattha sam- 
padana". [ta’datthe=tarh-that+atthe-result] 

(1) ünassa-the need. ® paripürlyà-for the purpose of filling up. tam 

civaram-that emergency robe. nikkhipitabbarh-should keep. 

i.e. That emergency robe should be kept to fulfil a (future) need. 
(2) buddhassa-of the Buddha. * atthaya-for the benefit. 

i.e. For the benefit of Buddha. 


401 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


(3) dhammassa-of the Dhamma. ® atthaya-for the benefit. 
i.e. For the benefit of Dhamma. 
(4) sanghassa-of the Sangha. * atthaya-for the benefit. jIvitam-(one's) 
life. pariccajami-(1) sacrifice. 
i.e. I sacrifice (my) life for the benefit of Sangha. 
icce’va’madi. so on. 


Tu'matthe- Examples of sampadana in dative case nouns with “aya” 
whose meaning is similar to turh-affixed Kita verbs expressive of “to- 
infinitive, purpose". [tumatthe=turh+atthe] 

(1)  loka’nukampaya-for compassion of the world. * atthaya-for the 
benefit. ® hitaya-for the wellbeing. ° sukhaya-for the happiness. de- 
vamanussanath-of human and divine beings. Buddho-the Lord Bud- 
dha. loke-in the world. uppajjati-arises, emerges. 

i.e. The Lord Buddha appears in the world for the compassionate action of 
the world, for the benefit, wellbeing and happiness of human and divine 
beings. 

(2) bhikkhunarh-of the monks. * phasuviharaya-for purpose of living in 
peace. Vinayo-the monastic codes (rules and regulations). pafifiatto- 
clearly set out, set forth. 

i.e. The monastic codes are imposed for (benefit of promoting) peaceful 
living of all the monks. 
icce’va’madi. 

Note: The words ending in “aya” are sampadana, which are similar to turh- 

affixed Kita verbs expressive of purpose. See Sutta 109 for *aya". This is 

called Tumattha sampadana. 


Ala’ matthappayoge—Examples of sampadana in the context of the 
nipáta particle “alan” 
ala’ miti arahati,patikkhittesu. 
The nipata word “alarn” has two meanings: worthiness and rejection. 
(Below are examples of sampadana in the context of the nipata word “alah” 
meaning worthiness. Please carefully note that depending on the meaning, 
the case-ending (vibhatti) of the corresponding word, will change. In this 
meaning, the contextual word is in nominative case) 
(1) alarh-deserves, is good. ° me-to me. buddho-Buddha. 

i.e. I deserve (to see) Buddha. 
(2) alarh * me rajjarh-kingdom. i.e. I deserve (to rule) the kingdom. 


402 


Karaka Kappa 


(3) alam bhikkhu-monk. * pattassa-bowl. 
i.e. The monk deserves (to have) bowl. 

(4) alam mallo-boxer. ° mallassa-boxer. 
i.e. The boxer deserves (to wrestle with other) boxer. 

(5) arahati-deserves (to fight or play against.) mallo * mallassa. 
i.e. The boxer deserves (to play against the other) boxer. 


Patikkhitte—(Examples) when the “alam” means rejection. (Here, the con- 

textual word is either in nominative or instrumental case.) 

(1) alath-of no use. ® te-for you. rüpam-beauty. karanryam-cosmetically 
made. i.e. your cosmetically made beauty is of no use. (for the spiritual 
progress etc.) 

(2) alam ° me-for me. hirafifia, suvannena-by silver and gold. 

i.e. Gold and silver is of no use for me (I do not need it). 
icce' va! madi. 

Maífiati-ppayoge,anadare,appanini-Examples of sampadana in 

context of the word “maññe” expressing disrespect, lifeless stuff. 

(1) * katthassa-(like) the wood. tuvam-you. mafifie-I Think. 

i.e. I regard you (like a piece of) wood. 

(2) * kalingarassa-(like) useless chaff. tuvam maññe. 

i.e. I regard you (like useless) chaff. 


Anadare'ti kimattham? What is the word *anadare" for? 

To show that the example below does not mean for “‘anadara- 
disrespect”. So, it is inapplicable. (catutthi vibhatti is not applied, in- 
stead, dutiya only applied). 

* suvannarh-gold. viya-like. * tarh-you. mafifie. 

i.e. I regard you like gold (You are like the precious gold). 
Appaninr ti kimattham? What is the word “appanini” for? To 
show that the example below is not an “appanini-a lifeless stuff" 
which is said in derogatory mode. So, it is inapplicable. (Hence, 
dutiya, accusative case only is applied). 

* gadrabham-(like) mule. * tuvarh maññe. i.e. I think you as a mule. 
icce’va’madi. 

Gatya’ttha’kammani-Examples of sampadana serving the role of 
Kamma (object) in the context of verbs with the root meaning “motion”. 


403 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


(1) * gamassa-to village. padena-by foot. gato-(he has) gone. 
i.e. He has gone to village on foot. 

(2) * nagarassa-to city. padena gato. 
i.e. He has gone to the city on foot. 

(3) appo-a few. * saggaya-to heaven. gacchati-goes. 
i.e. A few go to heaven. [Here, the sampadana word is with aya-function, 
in dative case] 

* saggassa-to heaven. gamanena-by going. va-in other usage. 

[Here ordinary sa-vibhatti, with no “aya” function] 

(4) * mülaya-to the original state of normalcy. patikasseyya-(should) 
pull. sahgho-the community of Sangha. i.e. the Sangha (should) pull 
(reinstate that monk back) to the original state of normalcy. 


Dutiya ca-Examples where accusative (dutiya) case is applicable: 
(1) * gamarh-to village. padena gato. i.e. He has gone to the village on 
foot. 
(2) * nagaram-to city. padena gato. i.e. He has gone to the city on foot. 
(3) appo * saggarh-to heaven. gacchati. i.e. A few go to the heaven. 
* saggam-to heaven. gamanena va. 
(4) * mülam- patikasseyya sangho. i.e. the Sangha (should) pull (rein- 
state that monk back) to the original state of normalcy. 
icce’va’madi. 
Asisa’ tthe—Examples of sampadana in the context of “wishing well": 
Note: The sampadana, receiver of well-wishes is in dative case in all exam- 
ples. 
(1) * ayasmato-for Venerable. dighayuko-(being) long life. hotu-may it 
be! i.e. May you be of long-life! 
(2) bhaddarh-good fortune or blessing. * bhavato-for your honorable. 
hotu! i.e. May there be good fortune or blessing for your honorable! 
(3) kusalam-wholesomeness . ० bhavato hotu! 
May there be wholesomeness (auspiciousness) for your honorable! 
(4) anamayam-(being) healthy. « bhavato hotu! 
May there be healthiness for your honorable! 
(5) sukham-happiness. * bhavato hotu! 
May there be happiness for your honorable! 
(6) svagatam-welcome. * bhavato hotu! 
You are welcome your honorable! 
(7) attho-benefit. ० bhavato hotu! 


404 


Karaka Kappa 


May there be benefit for your honorable! 

(8) hitam-good. * bhavato hotu! May there be good for your honorable! 

icce’va’madi. 

Sammuti-ppayoge— Examples of sampadana in context of the word 

“sammuti-to formally acknowledge”: 

(1) afifiatra-except for. sanghasammutiya-formal recognition of Sangha. 
* bhikkhussa-of a monk (for a monk). vippavatthum-to live apart. 
na-not. vattati-permissible. i.e. Except through formal recognition of 
release from Sangha, a monk should not live apart (with his robes). 

(2) sadhu-(it is) good. sammuti-giving formal recognition. ० me-for me. 
tassa-that. bhagavato-Buddha. dassanaya-to see. 

i.e. It is good giving me formal recognition to see that Buddha. 
icce’va’madi. 

Bhiyya-ppayoge- Examples of sampadana in context of the word “bhiy- 

ya-beyond measure, excessively”: 

bhiyyoso-in excess, beyond. * mattaya-of measure. icce’va’madi. 


Sattamya’tthe— Examples of sampadana in the locative sense: 

(1) * tuyhafi'ca'ssa avi karomi, [tuyhafi’ca’ssa-tuyharh+ca+assa] 
assa tuyharh ca-in the presence of that you also. AVi-openly. 
karomi-(I) do, admit. i.e. I openly admit in the presence of that you. 

(2) * tassa * me-to that me. sakko-the king of heaven. patu’rahosi 

[patu’rahosi=patu-vividly, visiblerahosi-was] patu-clearly visible. 
ahosi-was. The king of heaven appears to that me. 
i.e. Sakka, the king of heaven appeared to me. 

icce’va’madi. 

Note: “tuyham assa-that you", “tassa me-that me” are emphatic use of ref- 

erence which used to be frequently found in the Pali texts. 


Atthaggahanena bahüsu akkharappayogesu dissati. 


By the word “attha”’, [refer to “attha” in "Sattamya'tthesu-sattami-atthesu"] 
sampadana expression is also possible in the context of other 
“akkhara-words”. 
Tam yatha? For example, 
(1) upamarh-simile. * te-your (to you). karissami-(1) will do. 

i.e. I will do (i.e. show) you simile (for easy understanding). 


405 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


(2) dhammam-Dhamma. * vo-you. desessami-(I) will preach. 
i.e. I will preach you the Dhamma. 


Sara'tthe ca-(Here are some examples) related to noble meanings such as 

Buddha etc, too: 

(1) desetu-teach. bhante-Venerable Lord. bhagava-Buddha. 
dhammam-Dhamma. ® bhikkhunarh-to the monks. 

i.e. Lord Buddha! teach Dhamma to the monks. 

(2) * tassa-of that person. phasuviharaya-for peaceful living. hoti-is. 
i.e. (That) is for the purpose of peaceful living of that person. 

(3) * etassa-this person. pahineyya-(he) should send. 

i.e. (He should) send that person. 

(4) yatha-in which manner. * no-to us. bhagava-Buddha. vyakareyya- 
would answer. tatha’pi-in that manner too. ® tesarh-to them. vyakari- 
ssama-(We are going to) tell. 

i.e. We will tell them in the way Buddha would tell us. 

(5) kappati-is permissible. * samananarh-to the monks. àyogo-cloth- 
belt. i.e. Is a cloth-belt permissible for the monks? (to band around the 
waist to keep the upper robe in place firmly so as to prevent it from flut- 
tering and slipping off) 

(6) ° amhakam-for us. manina-with ruby. attho-want. 

i.e. We want ruby. 

(7) ki’mattho ® me. buddhena. [kima’ttho=kith+attho] kirh-what. 
attho-result. i.e. What benefit * me-for me. buddhena- with Buddha. 
i.e. Of what benefit for me with Buddha? or I have nothing to do with 
Buddha. 


(8) seyyo-noble. ० me-for me. attho-(May there be) the benefit. 
i.e. (May there be) the noble benefit to me. 
(9) bah’ pakara-of great help. bhante-Lord Buddha! mahapajapati- 
gotamI-(Y our aunt, foster mother) Mahapajapati Gotami. 
* bhagavato-for the lord Buddha. 
i.e. Lord Buddha! (your aunt) Mahapajapati Gotami was of great help to 
you (when you were very young). 
(10) bahü"pakara-of much help. bhikkhave-monks. matapitaro- par- 


ents. * puttanam-to children. 
i.e. Monks! parents are of great help to (their) children. 


icce' va! madi. Sesesu akkharappayogesu'pi afife’pi payoga 
payogavicakkhanehi yojetabba. 


406 


Karaka Kappa 


All those remaining examples of sampadana expressions can 
also be applied by those skilled in the grammatical examples. 


Caggahanam vikappanattha, vaggahana’nukaddhanattham. 


The word “ca” in Sutta has the purpose of pulling in the word 
“va” which has a meaning of “vikappana (intellectual thinking 
on grammatical issues)” from the preceding Sutta to this Sutta. 


Ye keci saddà sampadanappayogika maya no’ padittha, tesam 
gahanattharh idha vikappiyati vasaddo. 


Any instances of possible sampadana examples yet unexplained 
by me in this Sutta, can also be applied. The word “vā” is pulled 
into this Sutta to allow such grammatical possibility. 


Tam yatha? What are (some of) such examples? 
(1) * bhikkhusanghassa-of community of monks. pabhü-is the lord. 
ayam-this. bhagava-Buddha. 
i.e. This Buddha is the lord (i.e. Chief) of community of monks. 
(2) * desassa-of region. pabhü ayam raja-this king. 
i.e. This king is the lord of the region. 
(3) * khettassa-of the farming field. pabhü ayam gahapati-this 
householder. i.e. This householder is the lord of farming field. 
(4) * arafifiassa-of the forest. pabhü ayam luddako-this hunter. 
i.e. This hunter is the lord of forest. 
icce'va' madi. and so on. 
What do these examples mean? It means that the use of the word “Pabhii” 
can also necessitates a sampadana. Its corresponding noun has to be in the 
dative case in the way certain English words like “want” or “listen” are to be 
usually used with the preposition “to” etc. 


Kvaci dutiya, tatiya, paficami, chatthi, sattamya’tthesu ca. 
In some instances, the expression of sampadana can also happen 


in the sense of dutiya (accusative), tatiya (instrumental), paficamt (ab- 
lative), chatth (genitive) and sattami (locative). 


407 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


२७८, 330. योधारो त मोकासं 
278, 320. Yo’dharo ta^ mokasarn. 


[Yo+adharot+tarh+okasam. 4 words] 
[V] Yo adharo, tam okasasafitiam hoti. 


That which assumes the role of a location (in regard of 
time, things, events and other various conditions on which 
things come to pass) is to be named “okasa or adhara 
(Locative) ". 


Sva'dhàro catubbidho: vyapiko, opasilesiko, vesayiko 
samipiko ca’ti. 
That adhara is of four kinds. Namely: 
(1) Vyapika adhara locative by means of permeation. 
[vyapika-viVapat+nika, vyapa-being permeated all over, ika- pertaining 
to. “a” is a vuddhi vowel of “a” in the root apa.] 
(2) Opasilesika adhara locative by being stuck closely (in a 
place or with something. i.e. contact. or by being related to 
in terms of time or any correlative situation. 
[opasilesika-upaVsilisa+nika, upasilisa-being closely stuck, in close 
contact with, related. ika-pertaining to. “o” is a vuddhi vowel of *u" in 
upa. There is also a vuddhi vowel “e” of the second “1” of the root sili- 
sa-to stick to] 
(3) Vesayika adhara, by mode of domain where one be- 
comes a part of it or an integral element in it. 
[vesayika-visaya+nika, visaya-domain, ika-pertaining to. “e” is a 
vuddhi vowel of “i” in visaya.] 
(4) Samipika adhara, by mode of proximity, nearness. 
[samipika-samipatika, samipa-near, proximity, nika-pertaining to. “a” 
is a vuddhi vowel of the first “a” in samipa.] 
Tattha vyapiko tava—Of those four, at first (here are the examples 
of) vyapika adhara. 
e jalesu-in the waters. khirarh-milk. titthati-stands, i.e. exists. 
i.e. The milk exists in the water. 
e tilesu-in sesame seeds. telarh-oil. i.e. The oil is in the sesame. 
* ucchüsu-in the sugar-cane plants. raso-the taste. 
i.e. The (sweet) taste is in the sugar-cane (being spread all over in 
it). 


408 


Karaka Kappa 


Opasilesiko-(Here are the examples of) opasilesika adhara. 
* pariyanke-on the royal couch. raja-the king. seti-lies down. 
i.e. The king lies down on the couch. 
e àsane-in (the assigned) seat. upavittho-dwells. saügho-the 
Sangha. i.e. The Sangha dwells in the seat. 


Vesayiko—(Here are the examples of) vesayika adhara. 
e bhümrisu-on the earth. manussa-humans. caranti-move 


about. i.e. The humans move on the earth (they cannot live 
being separated from it as the earth is their domain of life). 


e antalikkhe-in the sky. vàyü-the winds. vayanti-blow. 
i.e. The winds blow in the space. 

e dkase-in the sky. sakuna-the birds. pakkhandanti-fly. 
i.e. The birds fly in the sky. 


Samipiko—(Here are examples of) samipika adhara. 

* vane-in the forest. hatthino-the elephants. caranti-move 
about. 
i.e. The elephants move in the forest. 

e gangayarh-in the river Ganges. ghoso-the noise. titthati- 
exists. 
i.e. The noise exists in the river Ganges. 

e vaje-in the cattle pen. gàvo-the cows. duhanti-(are) milked. 
i.e. The cows are milked in the cattle pen. 

e savatthiyarh-in the city of Savatthi. viharati-(Buddha) lives. 

* jetavane-in the Jeta grove temple. i.e. Buddha lives in the Jeta- 
grove temple in the city of Savatthi. 


Okasa'micca' nena kvattho? Okase sattami. 
What is the benefit by terming *okasa"? 
It has the benefit of ease of reference in such Suttas as: 
*Okase sattamr" etc. 


409 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


२७९, २९२. येन वा कयिरते तं करणं 
279, 292. Yena và kayirate tam karanam. 
[Yena+va+kayirate+tam+karanarh. 5 words] 
[V] Yena va kayirate, yena và passati, yena và sunati, 
tam karakarh karanasafifiam hoti. 





That by means of which an action is done, by means of 


which one sees or hears, is called “karana, the instrumental". 
[See the karana words in the instrumental cases] 


* dattena-by sickle. vihim-the paddy plant. lunati-(He) cuts. 
i.e. He cuts paddy by sickle. 

e vasiya-by adze. kattharh-the wood. tacchati-(He) chops (to 
shape). 
i.e. He chops (to shape) the wood by adze. 

e pharasuna-by axe. rukkharh-the tree. chindati-(He) cuts down. 
i.e. He cuts down the tree by axe. 

* kudalena-by shovel. pathavim-the soil. khanati-(He) digs. 
i.e. He digs the soil by shovel. 

० satthena-by knife. kammarh-the work. karoti-(He) does. 
i.e. He does the work by means of the knife. 

e cakkhuna-by eye. rüpam-the sight. passati-(He) sees. 
i.e. He sees the sight by the eye. 

Karana'micca'nena kvattho? Karane tatiya. 

What is the benefit by terming “karana’’? 

It has the benefit of ease of reference in such Suttas as: 


a? 


“Karane tatiya" etc. 


२८०, २८५, यं करोति d कम्मं 
280, 285. Yam karoti tah kammam. 
[Yarn+karoti+tarn+kammarh. 4 words] 
[V] Yam va karoti, yam va passati, yam va sunati, 
tam karakam kammasafifiam hoti. 


That which is being done, or being seen or being heard etc. 
is called “kamma, the Object”. 
[See Kamma words in the accusative case] 


410 


Karaka Kappa 


* chattam-umbrella. karoti-(He) makes. i.e. He makes an umbrella. 
e ratham-the chariot or vehicle. karoti-(He) makes. 
i.e. He makes the chariot. 
e rüpam-the sight. passati-(He) sees. i.e. He sees the sight. 
* saddam-the sound. sunati-(He) hears. i.e. He hears the sound. 
* kantakam-the thorn. maddati-(He) tramples on. 
i.e. He tramples on the thorn. 
* visam-poison. gilati-(He) swallows. i.e. He swallows the poison. 


Kamma’micca’nena kvattho? Kammatthe dutiya. 
What is the benefit by terming “kamma”? 
It has the benefit of ease of reference in such Suttas as 


a? 


“Kammatthe dutiya” etc. 


२८१, २९४. यो करोति स कत्ता 

281, 294. Yo karoti, sa’ katta. 
[Yotkarotitsot+katta. 4 words] 

[V] Yo karoti, so kattusañño hoti. 


Whoever does an action (or whichever facilitates to hap- 


pen), is called a “kattu or katta (doer, i.e. the subject)”. [See the 
Kattu words in instrumental case] 


* ahina-by snake. dattho-(is) bitten. naro-man. 
i.e. The man is bitten by snake. 

e garulena-by garuda bird. hato-(is) killed. nago-the dragon. 
i.e. The dragon is killed by garuda bird. 

e buddhena-by Buddha. jito-(is) conquered. màro-the evil one. 
i.e. The evil one is conquered by Buddha. 

e upaguttena-by Venerable Upagutta. maro-the evil one. bandho- 
(1s) bound, restrained. 
i.e. The evil one is restrained by Venerable Upagutta. 

Kattu-icca'nena kvattho? Kattari ca. 

What is the benefit by terming “kattu (subject)? 

It has the benefit of ease of reference in such Suttas as 

"Kattari ca" etc. 


411 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


२८२, २९५. यो कारेति स हेतु 
282, 295. Yo kāreti. sa’ hetu. [Yotkareti+so+hetu. 4 words] 
[V] Yo kattaram kāreti, so hetusafifio hoti, katta ca. 


The one who prompts someone (while doing something) to 
do, (that prompter) is named “hetu, reason, prompter" as well 
as “katta-agent or subject". 

Summary: This Sutta defines the nature of hetu katta or 
causative subject in a causative sentence. 


(1) * so puriso-that man. tam purisam-to that man, i.e. him. 
kammarh-work. kareti-(causes) to do. 
i.e. That man prompts him to do the work. 

(2) * so puriso-that man. tena purisena-to that man. kammam 
kareti. [the same meaning] 

(3) * so puriso-that man. tassa purisassa-to that man. kammam 
kareti. [the same meaning] 

Evam-in the same way, 

hareti-(causes) to bring, patheti-(causes) to recite, pàceti-(causes) 

to cook, dhareti-(causes) to carry. 

Hetu-icca’nena kvattho? Dhatühi ne naya nape napaya 

karitani hetvatthe. 

What is the benefit by terming “hetu”? 

It has the benefit of ease of reference in such Suttas as 

*Dhatühi ne, naya, nape, napayakaritani hetvatthe" etc. 

Note: The examples shown in this Sutta are causative sentence and 

verb examples. Please note the structural patterns carefully. It will be 

seen that there is one causative subject, two objects and one causative 


verb. These will be the integral parts of a typical causative sentence. 
Also note the case-endings applicable in the subject and the objects. 


२८३, ३१६. यस्स वा परिग्गहो d सामी 


283, 316. Yassa và pariggaho, tam sami. 
[Yassatvatpariggaho-tamr-sami. 5 words] 
[V] Yassa và pariggaho, tam samisafifiam hoti. 


412 


Karaka Kappa 


The one who possesses something, is called “sami (the own- 


er, possessive)”. 
[See the “sami words" in the genitive case. This sami is non-karaka] 


* tassa bhikkhuno-of that monk. pativiso-share, portion. 
i.e. that monk's share. 
* tassa bhikkhuno patto-bowl, i.e. that monk's bowl. 
e tassa bhikkhuno civararm-robe, i.e. that monk’s robe. 
* attano-of oneself. mukhath-face. i.e. One's face. 
Sami-icca’nena kvattho? Samismim chatthi. 
What is the benefit by terming “sāmi”? 
It has the benefit of ease of reference in such Suttas as 


799 


*Samismim chatth?" etc. 


२८४, २८३. fora पठमा 

284, 283. Linga'tthe pathama. 
[Linga-atthe+pathama. 2 words] 

[V] Lingattha'bhidhanamatte pathamavibhatti hoti. 


The pathama vibhatti (nominative case) should be applied 
when signifying the definitive gender and its meaning (be it 
a masculine or a feminine or a neuter) in nominative sense. 


[Plain nouns] ® puriso-man. ® purisa-men. 

[Numeral nouns] * eko-one. * dve-two. 

[Nipata, indeclinables] ® ca-also. ® va-either or. 

[Vocative indeclinable particles] * he! * ahe! * re! * are!-hey, Hi! 
Note: These examples show a wider variety of words where this 
pathama vibhatti is to be applied. But the vibhatti applied after the inde- 
clinable words such as nipdta and other indeclinable words are usually 


to be elided while the vibhattis applied after other ordinary nouns un- 
dergo various forms of morphological changes. 


२८५, ७०. आलपने च 

285, 70. Alapane ca. [Alapanetca. 2 words] 

[V] Alapana’ttha’ dhike lingattha’bhidhanamatte ca 
pathamavibhatti hoti. 


413 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


When addressing and signifying the meaning of mere gen- 
der, pathama vibhatti is to be applied after that noun being 
addressed to (also after the vocative particles such as “bho, he” etc). 


[Singular] bho * purisa!-Oh man! 
[Plural] bhavanto * purisa!-Oh men! 
[Singular] bho ® raja!-Oh king! 

[Plural] bhavanto * rajano!-Oh Kings! 


[Singular] he * sakhe!-Oh friend! [Plural] he * sakhino!-Oh 
friends! 
Note: This Alapana (vocative) is non-Karaka. 


२८६, २९१. करणे ततिया 
286, 291 Karane tatiya. [Karane+tatiya. 2 words] 
[V] Karanakarake tatiyavibhatti hoti. 


When expressing a karana, tatiya vibhatti (instrumental case) 
is to be applied after the noun denoting it. 


* aggina-by fire. kutim-the hut. jhapeti-burns. 
i.e. The hut burns by fire. 

e manasa-by mind. ce-if. ® padutthena-unwholesome. 
i.e. If (committed) by unwholesome mind. 

* manasa-by mind. ce-if. * pasannena-clean or wholesome. 
i.e. If (committed) by wholesome mind. 

* kayena-by body. kammarh-deed, work. karoti-(he) does. 
i.e. He does the deed or the work by (means of) body. 


२८७, २९६, सहादियोगे च 
287, 299. Saha’diyoge Ca. [Saha-adiyoge-*ca. 2 words] 
[V] Sahadiyoga'tthe ca tatiyavibhatti hoti. 


When used in the contexts of words such as “saha (together) 
and so on", a tatiya vibhatti (instrumental case) is to be ap- 
plied after the noun related thereto. 


(1) saha’ pi-together also. ० gaggena-with a monk named *Gagga". 
sangho-the Sangha. uposatham-(twice monthly recital of the 


414 


Karaka Kappa 


vinaya rules called) uposatha. kareyya-should conduct. 
vinà'pi-without also, ® gaggena-with a monk named “Gagga”. 
[Here the contextual nipata is “saha-with, vina-without"] 

i.e. Sangha should conduct uposatha either with Venerable Gagga 
or without him in attendance. 

(2) ° mahata-with a large. ° bhikkhusanghena-community of 
monks. saddhirh-together. i.e. together with a large community 
of monks. [Here the contextual nipdta is *saddhir-together"] 

(3) * sahassena-with a thousand. samath-equally. mita-(are) meas- 
ured. 

i.e. (They) are equally measured with a thousand. [Here the nipata 
is ^samam-equal to".] 

Note: This Sutta enjoins to apply Tatiya vibhatti (instrumental case) 

when certain nipdta particles which means “with, together, similar to, 

equal with, without” and so on are used in the context of a sentence. 


२८८, 383. SAL च 
288, 293. Kattari ca. [Kattari+ca. 2 words] 
[V] Kattari ca tatiyavibhatti hoti. 


When expressing a katta (subject) (in a Kamma-dominant 
passive voice sentence) tatiya vibhatti (instrumental case) is 
to be applied after the noun denoting the subject. 
Please note carefully that this Sutta enjoins to apply tatiya vibhatti only 
after a subject in a passive voice sentence, not in an active voice sen- 
tence. This kind of subject is called "avutta Katta" which means non- 
principal subject in a Kamma-dominant passive voice sentence. 





e rafifla-by king. hato-(is) killed. poso-man. 
i.e. The man is killed by the king. 

* yakkhena-by (a) spirit. dinno-(is) given, granted. varo-a boon. 
i.e. A boon is given (granted) by (the) spirit. 

* ahina-by snake. dattho-(is) bitten. naro-man. 
i.e. The man is bitten by the snake. [All are passive voice sentences] 


२८९, २९७. हेत्वत्ये च 
289, 297. Hetva’tthe ca. [Hetu-atthe+ca. 2 words] 
[V] Hetva’tthe ca tatiyavibhatti hoti. 


415 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


When expressing a reason, tatiya vibhatti (instrumental case) 


is to be applied after the noun denoting the reason. 
Note: This type of vibhatti is called "Instrumental of reason". 


* annena-by rice. vasati-(he) lives. 
i.e. He lives by (means of) rice. 

* dhammena-by Dhamma. vasati-(he) lives. 
i.e. He lives by means of Dhamma. 

* vijjaya-by knowledge. vasati-(he) lives. 
i.e. He lives by means of knowledge. 

० sakkarena-by devotion. vasati-(he) lives. 
i.e. He lives by means of devotion. 


२९०, २९८. सत्तम्यत्थे च 
290, 298 Sattamya'tthe Ca. [Sattami-atthe+ca. 2 words] 
[V] Sattamya’ tthe ca tatiyavibhatti hoti. 


(As an exceptional usage,) tatiya vibhatti (Instrumental case) 
can also be applied in the locative sense. [See the examples and 
meanings carefully as such examples are frequently found in the texts] 
Examples of Instrumental case in the Locative sense: 

* tena kalena, * tena samayena-at that time, then. 

* yena kalena, * yena samayena-at which time, when. 


* tena kho pana * samayena-at that time, then. 
[^kho & pana" are two particles without meaning here though they 
may have meaning sometimes in some instances.] 


२९१, २९९. येनङ्गविकारो 

291, 299 Yena’ngavikaro. [Yenatangavikaro. 2 words] 

[V] Yena vyadhimata angena angino vikaro lakkhiyate, 
Tattha tatiyavibhatti hoti. 
When expressing a physical defect, a tatiya vibhatti (instru- 
mental case) is applied after the noun denoting the defective 
bodily part. [See the examples to clarify this injunction] 


(1) * akkhina-by eye. kano-is blind. 
i.e. the one who is blind by eye. 


416 


Karaka Kappa 


(2) ° hatthena-by hand. kuni-(the one who is) crooked. 
i.e. the one who is crooked by hand. 
(3) kanarh-(the one who is) blind. passati-(he) sees. * nettena-by 
eye. ie. By eye, he sees the (other) blind person. 
(4) * padena-by foot. khafijo-(the one who is) lame. 
i.e. the one who is lame by foot. 
(5) * pitthiya-by back. khujjo-(the one who is) bent. 
i.e. the one who is bent by back, hunchbacked. 


२९२, ३००. विसेसने च 
292, 300. Visesane ca. [Visesanetca. 2 words] 
[V] Visesana’tthe ca tatiyavibhatti hoti. 


When expressing a modifying quality of adjective 
(visesana), tatiya vibhatti (instrumental case) is applied after 


that noun denoting the adjective of modification. 
[See Visesana words in instrumental case] 


* gottena-by race. gotamo-(is) gotama. natho-Lord Buddha. 
i.e. Lord Buddha is Gotama by race. 
e suvannena-by (having) golden complexion. abhirüpo-(is) 
handsome. 
i.e. (He) is handsome by (virtue of having) golden complexion. 
* tapasa-by austerity. uttamo-(is) noble. 
i.e. (He) 1s noble by (the practice of) austerity. 


Visesana 

Here, the students should understand the visesana, which means 
distinguishing attributive. There are two kinds of visesanas. 
They are: 
(1) Tulya' dhikarana Visesana [tulya-similar*adhikarana position, 

i.e. vibhatti case-ending. The appositional visesana] 
(2) Bhinna' dhikarana Visesana [bhinna-dissimilar-adhikarana- 

position, i.e. vibhatti case-ending. Non-appositional visesana] 

Both play important roles in the structure of a sentence. Both are qualifier 
adjectives in different word-forms playing the same role. 


417 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


The former qualifies a noun of similar case-ending while the latter qualifies 
a noun of different case-ending. In this Sutta, only the latter is to be taken as 
the referred visesana to be applied with a tatiya (instrumental case). 


Gender and Number 

A Visesana has its pair component-word known as “Visesya or 

Visesitabba" which means "the qualified". They are related to 

each other as the qualifier and the qualified in terms of syntacti- 

cal relationship and have to be of similar gender and number for 
the tulya' dhikarana visesana. The gender and number are usually 
determined by “Visesya or Visesitabba (the modified)" word. 

In order to simplify and make it clearly understandable for the 

students, here is some more detailed explanation on practical 

aspects: 

(a) If the word qualified is of masculine gender and singular, its 
qualifier word “Visesana” has to be also of the same mascu- 
line gender and singular in number. If plural, both has to be 
plural. 

Example: 

(1) abhirüpo puriso-the handsome man. (singular) 

(2) abhirupa purisa-the handsome men. (plural) 

Here, the qualified word or Visesya is puriso, a noun belonging to mascu- 
line gender and singular in number. The qualifier word (visesana) is “ab- 
hirupo”. So it has to follow gender and number of the word it qualifies. 
In example 2, the qualified word is plural. So, it has to be in plural too. 

(b) If the qualified is of feminine gender and singular, its quali- 
fier word *visesana" has to be of feminine gender and singu- 
lar. If plural, both has to be of the same numbers. 

Example: 

(1) abhirüpa itthi-the beautiful woman. 

(2) abhirüpayo itthiyo-the beautiful women. 

Here, the qualified word or visesya is itthi, a noun belonging to feminine 
gender and singular in number. The qualifier word (visesana) is “Ab- 
hirüpa". So, it has to follow gender and number of the word it qualifies. 
In example 2, the qualified word is plural. So, it has to be plural. 

(c) If the qualified is of neuter gender and singular, its qualifier 
word “visesana” has to be of neuter gender and singular. If 








418 


Karaka Kappa 


plural, both has to be of the same numbers. 
Example: 

(1) abhirüpam puppharh-the beautiful flower. 
(2) abhirüpani pupphani-the beautiful flowers. 


Here, the qualified word or visesya is puppham, a noun belonging to neu- 
ter gender and singular in number. The qualifier word (visesana) is “ab- 
hirüpam". So it has to follow the gender and number of the word it quali- 
fies. In example 2, the qualified word 15 plural. So, it has to be plural. As 
bhinna'dhikarana visesana is applicable visesana in this Sutta, it 
doesn't have to be of similar gender and numbers. The examples them- 
selves will clarify this. 


333, ३०१. सम्पदाने चतुत्थी 
293, 301 Sampadane catutthi. [Sampadane+catutthi. 2 words] 
[V] Sampadanakarake catutthivibhatti hoti. 


In cases of sampadana expression, catutthi vibhatti (dative 
case) Is applied after the noun denoting it. 


(1) ° buddhassa va-either to the Buddha. ० dhammassa ₹॥-० to 
the Dhamma. * sahghassa va-or to the Sangha. danarh-alms. 


deti-(He) offers. i.e. He offers alms either to Buddha, or to the 
Dhamma or to the Sangha. 


(2) data-giver. hoti-(He) is ® samanassa Va-either to the monk. 
* brahmanassa và-or to the Brahmin. 
i.e. (He 1s) the donor either to the monk or to the Brahmin. 


२९४, ३०५. नमोयोगादीस्वपि च 
294, 305. Namoyoga' disva'pi ca. 
[Namo, yoga-adisutapitca. 3 words] 
[V] Namoyoga'disva'pi ca catutthivibhatti hoti. 
A catutthi vibhatti (dative case) is also applicable in the con- 


text of the words “namo (to salute)" etc after the noun “being 
saluted". 


(1) namo-(my) bowing. * te-to you. buddha-Lord Buddha! vira- 
the lord of great effort! or brave one! atthu-(may it) be. [vira tthu- 
viratatthu] i.e. May my bowing (salutation) be to the Lord Buddha 


419 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


of great effort! 
(2) sotthi-blessing. * pajanarh-of beings. atthu-(may it) be. 
i.e. May blessings be to (all) beings! 
(3) namo-bowing. karohi-do. * nagassa-to the monk. 
i.e. Do bowing to the monk! 
[Here, nàga means an enlightened holy monk, not dragon nor snake] 
(4) svagatarh-auspicious coming. * te-your (to you). maharaja- 
great king! i.e. Welcome the great king! 
Note: the words sotthi (blessing), svagatam (welcome) etc, are includ- 
ed in the context for the application of catutthi. 
The word "atthu" in the example (2) is not from the original text. But 
shown to make the meaning of the sentence complete. Such kind of 
word is called pathasesa which means a complementary word. 


२९५, ३०७. अपादाने पञ्चमी 
295, 307. Apadane paficamti. [Apādāne+pañcamī. 2 words] 
[V] Apadanakarake paficamivibhatti hoti. 


In cases of an apadana expression, paficami vibhatti (abla- 


tive case) 1s applied after the noun denoting it. 
[See the apadana words in ablative case] 


* papa-from sin. cittam-the mind. nivaraye-should restrain. 
i.e. One should restrain the mind from sin. 
e abbha-from the cloud. mutto’va [mutto'va-mutto-iva] mutto- 
free. iva-like. candimà-moon. 
i.e. Like the moon being free from the clouds. 
* bhaya-from danger. muccati-is free. so naro-that man. 
i.e. That man is free from danger or fear. 


२९६, ३१४. कारणत्थे च 
296, 314 Karana'tthe Ca. [Karana-atthe*ca. 2 words] 
[V] Karana'tthe ca paficamivibhatti hoti. 


Paficami vibhatti (ablative case) is also used in expressing 
"the reason" after the noun denoting it. [See the words denoting 
the reason in the ablative case. Also refer to Sutta 108 for “a” function] 


420 


Karaka Kappa 


e ana'nubodhaà-for not knowing. * a’ppativedha-for not penetrat- 
ing (by means of insight knowledge, path and fruition knowledge). ca- 
tunnam-four. ariyasaccanarh-noble truths. yathabhütam-rightly. 
e adassana-for not seeing. 

i.e. For reasons of not knowing, not penetrating and not seeing four no- 
ble truths rightly. 

Note: Also see another Sutta No. 289 regarding the applicable vibhatti 
after such nouns denoting the reason. This paíicami is called "ablative 
of reason". 


२९७, २८४. कम्मत्ये दुतिया 
297, 284. Kamma'tthe dutiya. [Kamma-atthe+dutiya. 2 words] 
[V] Kamma'tthe dutiyavibhatti hoti. 


To denote a Kamma, dutiya vibhatti (accusative case) is to be 
applied after the noun denoting Kamma (the object). [See the 
kamma words in accusative case, singular *am"] 


e gavarh-the cow. hanati-(He) kills. 

e vihayo-the paddy plants. lunati-(He) cuts. 

* sattham-the weapon. karoti-(He) makes. 

* ghatam-the ghee. karoti-(He) makes. 

* ratharh-the chariot. karoti-(He) makes. 

* dhammarm-to the Dhamma. sunati-(He) listens. 
e buddhath-the Buddha. püjeti-(He) honors. 

* vàcam-the speech. bhasati-(He) says. 

* tandulam-the rice. pacati-(He) cooks. 

* coram-the thief. ghateti-(He causes to) kill. 


२९८. २८७. कालद्धानमच्चन्तसंयोगे 
298, 287. Kala'ddhana' maccantasamyoge. 


[Kala, addhanamr-accanta-samyoge. 2 words] 
[V] Kala'ddhànam accantasamyoge dutiyavibhatti hoti. 


When expressing a continuous, on-going action (or a situa- 
tion or something) which occurs for a certain period or 


421 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


which lasts up to a certain distance, dutiya vibhatti (accusa- 
tive case) 1s applied after the noun denoting time or distance. 


Examples of the Kala Accantasamyoga 
(Time-specific on-going incidence) 

(1) ° masam-for a month. mamsodanam-the meat-mixed rice. 

bhufijati-(He) eats. i.e. He eats the meat-mixed biryani rice for a month. 
(2) * saradam-for autumn. ramantya-is pleasant. nadi-the river. 

The river 15 pleasant for the period of autumn. 
(3) * masam-for a month. sajjhayati-(He) chants. 

He chants for a month. 


Examples of the Addhàna Accantasamyoga 
(Distance-specific on-going incidence) 
(1) * yojanam-for (the distance of) a yojana. vanaraji-is the forest 
shadow. The forest-shadow is for (up to) the distant of a yojana. 
i.e. The shadowy length of forest is up to a yojana's distance. 
(2) * yojanarh-for (the distance of) a yojana. digho-is long. pabbato- 
mountain. i.e. The length of mountain is for a yojana-distance long. 
(3) * kosarh-for (the distant of) a kosa. sajjhayati-(He) chants. 
He chants for a kosa. i.e. His chanting time lasts up to a kosa's distance. 
Accantasamyoge'ti kimattham"? 
What is the word *Accantasamyoge" for? 
To show that there is no nature of "*accantasamyoga" in the 
example shown below. So, no dutiya vibhatti is applied after it. 
[Only locative case is applied instead] 
* sarnvacchare-annually. bhojanam-the food. bhufijati-(He) eats. 
Note: Kosa and Yojana are measurement units of geographic distance in 
ancient India. 
Acca’nta=ati-beyond+anta-the end, the limit. i.e. continuously, without 
end. sarhyoga-being related to, involved. 


422 


Karaka Kappa 


२९९, २८८. कम्मप्पवचनीययुत्ते 
299, 288. Kamma’ppavacaniyayutte. 


[Kammappavacantyayutte. 1 word] 
[V] Kammappavacaniyayutte dutiyavibhatti hoti. 


When certain upasagga words complementary to a Kamma, 
are prefixed to a verb, dutiya vibhatti (accusative case) is to be 
applied after the Kamma-word which has a modified mean- 
ing afterwards. 


[The upasagga prefixes such as abhi and anu in the examples called 
“Kammappavacantya” are shown in bold, underlined.] 


(1) * tam kho pana-of that. ° bhavantam-honorable. 
* gotamam-gotama. evam-thus. kalyano-good. kittisaddo-the 
sound of fame. abbhuggato-spread far and wide. [abhi-being 
spreadt+uggato-rises. i.e. The good sound of fame of Buddha 
(referred to as Honorable Gotama) spread far and wide. 
(2) * pabbajita' manupabbajimsu. 
[pabbajitam-anu-following, in emulating+pabbajimsu] 
pabbajitarh-to the Buddha (who had entered into) monkhood. 
anupabbajimsu-(following him, his brethren too) become 
ordained. 
i.e. To the Buddha entering monkhood, (his brethren too) ordained 
emulatively. 
Note: Certain upasagga particles which can distinctively change the 
meaning of a Kamma word by affecting to have specific meaning are 
called “Kammappavacaniya-the meaning-enhancer of Kamma”. 
[Kamma-a Kamma, i.e. object+pa-speciallyt+vacaniya-to indicate] 


423 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


३००, २८६. गतिबुद्धिभुजपठहरकरसयादीनं कारिते वा 
300, 286. Gati buddhi bhuja patha hara kara saya’ 
dinam karite va. 
[Gati, buddhi, bhuja, patha, hara, kara, si-adtnarh+karite+va. 
3 words] 
[V] Gati,buddhi,bhuja,patha,hara,kara,saya'dinam payoge 
karite dutiyavibhatti hoti và. 


When certain verbs based in roots such as gamu, budha, 
bhuja, patha, hara, kara, si, are used in a causative sen- 
tence, dutiya vibhatti (accusative case) is sometimes applied 
after the noun denoting the Kamma (a subordinate object of the 
causative verb). 

Note: The injunction of this Sutta reflects only a common 
pattern of case-endings applicable after sub-ordinate object 
in a causative sentence. This kind of object is called a caus- 
ative-object or sub-ordinate object (Karita-Kamma or 
payujjita-Kamma). In addition to dutiya-vibhatti (accusa- 
tive) case, other cases such as tatiya (instrumental) and 
chatthi (genitive) cases can also be applied after the causa- 
tive-object. Please see the underlined words below which 
denote causative object in three case-endings. This is gen- 
erally observed grammatical rule regarding applicable 
vibhatti case-ending of the causative objects. 








(1) puriso-man. ® purisam-to the other man. ® gamath-to village. 
gamayati-makes (him) go, prompts to go. 
i.e. The man makes the other man (causes him to) go to the village. 
(also) The man prompts (i.e. orders) the other man (a servant) to go 
to the village. 

(2) puriso * purisena va, (Here the causative object is in instrume- 
ntal case singular.) 

(3) puriso * purisassa va. (Here the causative object is in genitive 
case singular.) 

Note: These two sentences have the same meaning, except the case- 

endings of causative-object which is shown underlined. 


KEvarh-in the same way. 


424 


Karaka Kappa 


bodhayati-causes him to know. bhojayati-causes him to eat. 
pathayati-causes him to chant. harayati-causes him to bring. 
karayati-causes him to do. sayapayati-causes him to lie down. 
Evam-(one should know the same pattern of causative sentences) in 
this way. sabbattha-in all. karite-(other) causative sentence too. 


३०१, ३१५. सामिस्मि छट्टी 
301, 315. Samismim chatthi. [Samismirn+chatthi. 2 words] 
[V] Samismim chatthivibhatti hoti. 


When expressing a sami (possessor or owner), chatthi vibhatti 
(genitive case) 18 applied after the noun denoting it. 


e tassa * bhikkhuno pativiso. * tassa ® bhikkhuno patto. 
e tassa * bhikkhuno civaram. * attano mukham. 
(Re: Sutta No. 283) 


303, ३१९. ओकासे सत्तमी 


302, 319. Okase sattami. [Okase-sattami. 2 words] 
[V] Okasakarake sattamivibhatti hoti. 


When expressing an okasa (locative), sattami vibhatti (loca- 
tive case) is to be applied after the noun denoting it. 


* gambhire-in deep. * odakantike-at the end of (underground) wa- 
ter. i.e. In the depth at the end of underground-water, (one keeps 
one's precious wealth as it is the custom in the ancient times.) 

e papasmirh-in sin. ramati-enjoys. mano-the mind. 

i.e. The mind enjoys in sin (unwholesome thoughts and things). 

* bhagavati-in (the presence of) Buddha. brahmacariyam-the 

noble practice. vussati-practices. kulaputto-the son of noble fami- 


ly. i.e. The son of noble family practices the noble Dhamma in 
Buddha. 


425 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


३०३, ३२१. सामिस्सराधिपति दायाद सक्खि पतिभू पसुत कुसलेहि च 
303, 321. Sami’ssara’ dhipati,dayada,sakkhi,patibhü 
pasuta,kusalehi ca. 
[Sami, issara, adhipati, dayada, sakkhi, patibhü, pasuta, 
kusalehi+ca. 2 words] 
[V] Samiissara,adhipati,dayada,sakkhipatibhu,pasuta, 
kusala, icce’tehi payoge chatthivibhatti hoti sattami ca. 


Either a chatthi (genitive case) or sattami vibhatti (locative 
case) are applicable in the context of the words such as 
"sami, issara, adhipati, dayada, sakkhi, patibhü, pasuta 
and kusala" after the nouns corresponding to those words. 
[See each pair of examples shown in two applicable case-endings] 


(1) * gonanam-of cows. sàmi-master, owner, i.e. the master of 
cows. ० gonesu-in/over the cows. sàmi-master, owner. 
i.e. the master over cows. 

(2) ° gonanam issaro-lord, i.e. the lord of cows. * gonesu issaro. 
i.e. the lord over cows. 

(3) * gonanam adhipati-ruler. ° gonesu adhipati. 

(4) * gonanam dayado-heir. * gonesu dayado. 

(5) * gonanam sakkhi-witness. * gonesu sakkhi, 

(6) * gonanam patibhü-guarantor. * gonesu patibhü. 

(7) * gonanam pasuto-progenitor. * gonesu pasuto. 

(8) * gonanam kusalo-skillful, expert. ० gonesu kusalo. 


३०४, 333. निद्धारणे च 


304, 322. Niddharane ca. [Niddharane+ca. 2 words] 
[V] Niddharana’tthe ca chatthivibhatti hoti, sattami ca. 


When making a selection (out of many for the purpose of 
comparison to highlight a distinction), either chatthi (geni- 
tive case) or sattami vibhatti (locative case) 1s applied after the 
noun denoting “many” from which the selection is made. 


Note: Please note that only chatthr or sattami vibhatti in 
the plural number can be used. As a rare exception, a sin- 


426 


Karaka Kappa 


gular in the locative case is found to be used in the Pali 
texts. See the sample examples and sentences shown below. 


(1) (a) kanha-the black one. ® gavinarh-of all cows. sampanna 
khiratama-(is of) more delicious milk. [chattht] Of all cows, 
the black cow is of the most delicious milk. 

(b) kanha ° gavisu-in or among all cows. sampannakhiratama 
[Here is a sattami case-ending, of the same meaning. | 

(2) (a) Sama-the gold-skinned one. ® narinam-of the women. 
dassaniyatama-most attractive. [chatthi] 

(b) Sama * nàrisu-in or among all women. dassaniyatama. 
[sattamr] Of all women, the gold-complexioned woman is the 
most attractive. 


(3) (a) * manussanam-of all men. khattiyo-the warrior. süratamo- 
the most brave. [Here is chatth1] 
(b) * manussesu-in or among all men. khattiyo süratamo. 
[sattamr] Of all men, the warrior is the most brave. 
(4) (a) * pathikanam-of all wayfarers. dhavanto-the runner. 
sighatamo-(is) the quickest. [chatthi] 
(b) * pathikesu-in or among all the wayfarers. dhavanto-the run- 
ner. sighatamo-(is) the quickest. Of all the travelers, the runner 
is the quickest. [sattami] 


Niddharana-Catukka 
(Niddharana-quadriad) 
According to traditional teaching of grammar devised by teach- 
ers, there are four Niddharana-related things which all students 
of Pali grammar should understand. They are called Niddharana- 
Catukka. Namely: 
(1) Niddharana-samudaya (The selection-group) 
(2) Niddharana (Act of Selection) 
(3) Niddharaniya (The selected) 
(4) Niddharana-hetu (The reason of selection) 


Of the three, 

(1) The group of people, animals or inanimate-things from which selection is 
being made is called Niddharana samudaya. 

(2) Making selection by act of pointing out the distinctive quality of someone 
or something is Niddharana. 


427 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


(3) Someone or something being selected for purpose of comparison is called 
Niddharaniya. 

(4) The distinctive qualities are Niddharana-hetu (the reason for selection). 
The function of this Sutta 1s applicable only after Niddharana-samudaya. 
This means that when making a selection for distinctive comparison, 
either chatthi or sattami vibhattis in plural are to be applied after nouns 
which denote Niddharana-samudaya (group from which selection is made). 


Explanation 

Example: Kanha * gavinam sampannakhiratama. 

(1) In the example above, the word *gavinam" which indicates the group of 
cows, is Niddharana-samudaya. That is why a chatthi vibhatti, plural 
number, is applied after it. [niddharana-selection*samudaya-group] 

(2) The words indicative of selection *sampannakhiratama" is 
Niddharana, which is a statement of distinction. [ni-out+dhara-to 
take+yu-act of] 

(3) The word “Kanha” which indicates black cow is Niddharaniya (the se- 
lected animal for its distinctive quality of milk). 

[ni+dhara+anīya-that which is being selected] 

(4) The distinctively delicious sweet taste of the milk produced by black cow 
is Niddharana-hetu (reason of selection. Hetu-reason) 

Now, the students can also easily analyze other niddharana examples based 

on this clear and simple explanation. 


३०५, 333. अनादरे च 
305, 323. Ana’dare ca. [Anadaretca. 2 words] 
[V] Ana’dare chatthivibhatti hoti, sattami ca. 


When expressing disrespect (in the context of two concur- 
ring actions, one being neglected, the other proceeding to 
perform an action regardless) either a chatthi (genitive case) 
or sattami vibhatti (locative case) can be applied after both 
the noun denoting “anadariya, the disrespected” and after 
its correlative word. [ana’dara=na-withoutradara-respect, disre- 
gard] 

Note: Please note that only one of chatthi or sattami 
vibhatti in the same number can be applied. See the sample 
sentences and examples below. Unlike in the Niddharana 





428 


Karaka Kappa 


expression, both singular and plural numbers are applicable 
in this “anadara expression". 





(1) * rudato-while crying, cgs. ° darakassa-the boy's (the boy), cgs. pab- 
baji-(the father) renounces, äv. [chatthi, singular example] i.e. While 
the boy 15 crying, the father renounced (to become an ascetic or a 
monk). 

(2) ° rudantasmirh-when crying, cls. ° darake-the boy, cls. pabbaji.av. 
[sattamr, singular, example] i.e. At the time (or as) the boy is crying, 
the father renounced (to become an ascetic or a monk). 


Ana’ dara-Catukka 
(Anadara-quadriad) 
Here too, there are four Anadara-related things the students of 
Pali grammar should thoroughly understand. They are called 
anadara-catukka. Namely: 
(1) Anadara (act of neglect) 
(2) Anadaravanta (anadara-correlative) 
(3) Anadariya (the neglected) 
(4) Anadariyavanta (anadariya-correlative) 


Of the three components, 

(1) The action of neglect to living things or inanimate-things is called 
anadara. In this case, it is usually a verb, expressive of such action. 

(2) Any word which is related to that act of anadara, such as the one who 
commit such act is called anadaravanta. It is usually a subject or a word 
denoting it. [anadara+vanta. See Sutta 368 for this suffix "vantu"] 

(3) Someone or something being neglected is called anadariya. 
[anadaratiya] 

(4) Any word syntactically related to it as a verb (usually an auxiliary verb) 

etc. is called anadariyavanta. [anadariyatvanta] 

The function of this Sutta is applicable only after anadariya and its cor- 

relative. This means that chatthi or sattami vibhattis are to be applied after 

the nouns which denote anadariya and its correlative words. 


429 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


Explanation 

Example: * Rudato * darakassa pita pabbaji. 

While the boy is crying, the father renounces. i.e. left (to become an ascetic). 

[The word *pita-father" is added to make the sentence more complete]. 

(1) In the example above, the word “darakassa” which indicates the neglect- 
ed, crying boy, is *anadariya-the disrespected or the neglected". That is 

why a chatthi, singular “sa” vibhatti is applied after it. 

(2) The word indicative of the boy's crying act ^Rudato" is anadariya-cor- 
relative which is related to “darakassa”. A similar chattht vibhatti is to be 
applied after it as it is anadariya-correlative. [Re: Sutta 187, 127, to 
understand the morphological procedure of this word] 

(3) The word “pita-father” which indicates the father who renounces home 
without compassionate regard for the crying boy is anadara-correlative 
(the neglector, which plays the role as a subject). 

(4) The word *pabbaji" which indicates “renouncing act" is anadara (a verb 
related to the subject as the doer of disrespectful act). 

Now, students can also easily analyze the second example by being based 
on the explanation of this example. 


Note: Despite it may literally mean “non-respect”, the actual 
purpose of this grammatical concept of *anadara" is to describe 
two concurrent actions going on (sometimes in a pitiful, frustrat- 
ing manner), not in the sense of intentional disrespect. 


Here is one more relevant example to clarify this: 


E.g. Natinarh pekkhatarh maccu adaya gacchati. 
While the relatives are looking on, the death goes (away) by snatching (the 
loved one). 


This example is very simple and vividly clear to understand. 

While relatives are looking on, or desperately thinking about 

what they can do for their sick, almost dying, beloved one who 

is lying on the bed, death invisibly takes away the loved ones as 

if snatching by force. 

In this example, 

(1) the words *adaya gacchati-goes by snatching” are anadara. 

(2) the word *maccu-death" is an anadara-correlative. 

(3) the word “fiatinarh-the relatives” is anadariya. 

(4) the word “pekkhatarh-while looking on" is its correlative 
(anadariyavanta). Both are in chatthi (genitive) plural case. 


430 


Karaka Kappa 


Regarding the word “pekkhatarn’, please refer to Sutta No.187, 128 on how 
this word is brought to completion through due morphological procedures. It 
is hoped that the students will clearly understand this seemingly complex 
grammatical concept and will be able to write such sentences on their own 
without much difficulty. 


३०६, २८९. क्वचि दुतिया छट्टीन AT 

306, 289. Kvaci dutiya chatthina’matthe. 
[Kvaci-*dutiya*chatthinam-atthe. 4 words] 

[V] Chatthina’matthe kvaci dutiyavibhatti hoti. 


(As an exceptional usage), a dutiya vibhatti sometimes can 
be applied in chatthi (genitive sense) expression. 
Note: This kind of dutiya (accusative) is called accusative-in-genitive 
sense found in the Pali texts. 
Example of the Accusative case in Genitive sense: 
apissu-in fact. * mam-(in) my (mind). aggivessana!-Oh Aggivessana! 
tisso-three. upama-similes. patibhamsu-intuitively come up. 
i.e. Oh Aggivessana! In fact, three similes come up in my mind intuitively 
(out of blue). 


३०७, २९०. ततियासत्तमीनञ्च 
307, 290. Tatiya,sattaminan’ca. 
[Tatiya, sattamtnarh+ca. 2 words] 
[V] Tatiya,sattaminarh atthe ca kvaci dutiyavibhatti hoti. 


(As an exceptional usage), a dutiya vibhatti (an accusative) 
sometimes can be used in tatiya (instrumental sense) and 
sattami (locative sense) expressions. 


Examples of the Accusative in Instrumental sense: 

(1) sace-if. e mam-with me. samano gotamo-the monk Gotama. 
alapissati-will talk. i.e. If the monk Gotama will talk with me. 

(2) tvafi’ca [tvafica-tvam-ca]-you too. * mam-with me. nabhibhasasi- 
do not talk [na*abhibhasasi]. i.e. You too do not talk with me. 


Evam tatiya’tthe. Thus, (these examples in the accusative case are) in the 
sense of instrumental. 


Examples of the Accusative in Locative sense: 


431 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


(1) * pubbanhasamayarh-in the morning. nivasetva-having dressed. 
i.e. Having dressed in the morning. 

(2) * ekarh-at one. ® samayath-time, i.e. on one occasion. bhagava-the 
lord Buddha i.e. At one time, the Lord Buddha (is staying in such and 
such a place etc.) 


Evam sattamya’ tthe. Thus, (these words in the accusative case) are in the 
sense of locative. 


३०८, ३१७. छट्टी च 
308, 317. Chatthi ca. [Chatthi+ca. 2 words] 
[V] Tatiya,sattaminam atthe ca kvaci chatthivibhatti hoti. 


(As an exceptional usage), a chatthi vibhatti sometimes can 
be applied in tatiya (instrumental, subject) and sattami 
(locative) sense expressions. 


Note: These kinds of chatthi are called the genitive-in-instrumental, the 
genitive-in-locative sense, which are found the Pali texts. 


Examples of the Genitive in Instrumental sense: 

(1) kato-done. * me-by me. kalyano-the good deed (meritorious deed). 
i.e. The good deed (1s) done by me. 

(2) katam * me paparh-unwholesome, bad deed. 
i.e. The bad deed (is) done by me. 


Evam tatiya’tthe. Thus, (these examples in genitive case) are in the sense 
of instrumental. 

Note: Please do not be confused with ordinary instrumental which normally 
means “with”. In this Sutta, it only means instrumental subject which 
means “by”, mostly found as the meaning of subjects used in passive voice 
sentences. This type of word in genitive case, but whose meaning is the in- 
strumental subject “by”, is usually referred to as "Katv'attha-chatthi" in 
grammatical terms. Such words usually play similar role of the subject in a 
passive voice sentence as the verbs they syntactically related to are structured 
using an affix of Kamma-sense only. This is one of a very delicate point of 
grammar. 

[Katv’attha-chatthi=kattu-subject in instrumental+attha-sense. chatthi- 
genitive-case word which has the sense and role of a Katta, i.e. Subject- 
genitive, or agent genitive]. 








Examples of the Genitive in Locative sense: 


432 


Karaka Kappa 


(1) kusala-(are) skillful. ° naccagitassa-in dancing and singing. sik- 
khita-trained. caturitthiyo [caturitthiyo=caturo+itthiyo], caturo- beau- 
tiful (चातुर्य -shrewdness, lovely). itthiyo-women. i.e. the pretty women 
skilled and trained in dancing and singing. 

(2) kusalo-(are) skillful? tvarh-you. rathassa-of chariot. ® angapac- 
canganam-in (things related to) various components. 

i.e. Are you skilled in the chariot's component parts? 


Evam sattamya’tthe. Thus, (these examples of genitive case) are in the 

sense of locative. 

Kvacr'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “kvaci” for? 

To show that in the example shown below, the function of Sutta 

is inapplicable as it is restricted by the word “kvaci”. 

(1) yo-which. vo-you. ananda!-Oh Ananda! * maya-by me. dhammo 
ca- Dhamma also. vinayo ca-monastic discipline also. desito-have 
taught. pafifiatto-have promulgated. 

i.e. Oh Ananda! Dhamma which have been taught and vinaya which had 
been prescribed by me (will be your teachers). 

(2) anando-Venerable Ananda. * atthesu-in matters of meanings (of the 
various Dhamma). vicakkhano-(is) wise. 

i.e. Ananda is wise in the matters of meanings of Dhamma. 


303, ३१८. दुतियापञ्चमीनञ्च 


309, 318. Dutiya,paficaminafi'ca. 
[Dutiya, paficaminam-4ca. 2 words] 
[V] Dutiya,paficaminafi'ca atthe kvaci chatthivibhatti hoti. 


(As an exceptional usage), a chatthi vibhatti (genitive case) 
sometimes can be used in dutiya (accusative) and paficamI 
(ablative) sense expressions. 


433 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


Examples of the Genitive in Accusative sense: 

(1) * tassa-to that person. bhavanti-will be. vattaro-those who censure. 
i.e. there will be people censuring him. [vattaro-speakers, those who say 
in displeasure and disapproval] 

(2) sahasa-in a hurry. ® kammassa-the action. kattaro-doers. 

i.e. those doing the action in a hurry. 


Evam dutiya'tthe. Thus, (these examples are) in the sense of accusative. 


Note: This type of words in genitive case, but whose meaning is the accusat- 
ive “to”, is usually referred to as "Kamma'ttha-chatthr" in a typical formal 
grammatical term. Such words usually play a similar role of the object in any 
sentence of both voices. [Kamma’ttha-chatthi=kamma-object in accusa- 
tivetattha-sense. chatthi-genitive case word. i.e. the object-genitive or pa- 


tient-genitive]. This 15 also very delicate point of grammar. 


Examples of the Genitive in Ablative sense: 
(1) assavanata-for reason of not hearing. ० dhammassa-from the 
Dhamma. parihayanti-(they) lost. 


i.e. They lost for not hearing Dhamma. 
[assavanata=a-not+savana-hearing+ta-suffix, due to a state of. See Sutta 360] 


(2) kin? nu kho [kin’nu kho=kirh+nut+kho] kim-why. aham-I. ® tassa 
sukhassa-from that happiness. bhayami-should be afraid of. 
i.e. Why I should be afraid of that happiness? 
(3) sabbe-all. tasanti-are frightened ० dandassa-from punishment. 
i.e. All are afraid of punishment. 
(4) sabbe bhayanti-fear. ° maccuno-from death. 
i.e. All are afraid of death. 
(5) bhito-feared. * catunnarh-from four. ® asivisanam-from quickly 
poisonous. * ghoravisanarh-from strongly poisonous. 
i.e. Being fearful of four snakes of quick poison and strong poison. 
(6) bhayami-(I) fear. * ghoravisassa-from strongly poisonous. 
* nagassa-from snake. 
i.e. I am afraid of the snake of strong poison. 
Evam paficamy 'atthe. Thus, (these examples are) in the sense of 
ablative. 


434 


Karaka Kappa 


३१०, ३२४. कम्मकरणनिमित्तत्येसु सत्तमी 


310, 324. Kamma,karana,nimitta’tthesu sattamri. 
[Kamma, karana, nimitta-atthesut+sattami. 2 words] 
[V] Kamma,karana,nimitta'tthesu sattamivibhatti hoti. 


(As an exceptional usage), a sattami vibhatti (locative case) 
sometimes can be applied in Kamma (accusative), karana 
(instrumental), and nimitta (reason-descriptive) sense ex- 
pressions. 

Note: These kinds of sattamr are called the locative in accusative-sense, 
the locative in instrumental-sense, locative of reason (reason-descriptive 
sattami, also called nimitta-sattami, or absolute-sattami) which are 
occasionally found in the canonical texts. The last kind of sattami is 
frequently found in many Suttas of this grammar text. 


Example of the Locative in Accusative sense: 

(1) sundara’ vuso [sundara’vuso= Sundara+avuso] sundara-(are) nice. 
avuso-Oh friends! ime-these. àJIvakà-heretics. * bhikkhüsu-to the 
monks. abhivadenti-bow (pay respect.) 

i.e. Oh friends! These heretics are nice that they bow to the monks. 


Evam kamma'tthe. 
Thus, (this example is) in the sense of kamma, accusative. 


Examples of the Locative in Instrumental sense: 
(1) * hatthesu-by hands. pindaya-for alms. caranti-go. 
i.e. By hands (the monks) go for alms. (They put food in the hands as they 
do not have bowls). 
(2) * pattesu-by bowls. pindaya caranti. 
i.e. By bowls (the monks) go for alms. 
(3) * pathesu-by roads. gacchanti-go. 
i.e. By (means of) roads, (people) go. 


Evam karana’tthe. 

Thus, (these examples are) in the sense of karana, instrumental. 

Examples of the Locative in Nimitta (Locative of reason) sense: 

(1) dipi-the leopard. * cammesu-for the skins. hafifate-(is) killed. 
i.e. The leopard is killed for (its) hide. 


(2) kufijaro-the elephant. ० dantesu-for tusks. hafifiate-(is) killed. 
i.e. The elephant is killed for (its) tusks (1vories). 


435 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


evar nimitta’tthe. 
Thus, (these examples are) in the sense of nimitta, reason. 


३११, ३२५. सम्पदाने d 
311, 325. Sampadane ca. [Sampadàne-ca. 2 words] 
[V] Sampadane ca sattamivibhatti hoti. 


(As an exceptional usage), a sattami vibhatti (locative case) 
is applied in the sampadana (dative sense) expression. 
Note: This kinds of sattami is called the locative in dative-sense, which 
is sometimes found in the canonical texts. 
Examples of the Locative in Dative sense: 
(1) * saüghe-of Sangha (community of monks as a whole). dinnam-the 
offered charity. mahapphalarh-(is) of great result. 
i.e. Alms donated to Sangha is of great benefit. 
(2) ° sanghe-of Sangha. tvarh-you. gotami!-Oh Gotami! dehi-give. 
i.e. Gotami! (you) donate to the Sangha. 
(3) * sanghe-of Sangha. te-by you. dinne-when given. ahafi'ce'va 
[aharhtcateva]-to me also. püjito-honored. bhavissami-will be. 
i.e. When Sangha is offered by you, it will be like honoring me (Buddha) 
too. (When you offer Sangha, it is like honoring me as well.) 


३१२, ३२६. पञ्चम्यत्थे च 
3 12, 326 Paficamya'tthe Ca. [Paficami-atthe+ca. 2 words] 
[V] Paficamya'tthe ca sattamivibhatti hoti. 


(As an exceptional usage), a sattami vibhatti (locative case) 
is applied in the pañcamī (ablative sense) expression. 
Note: This kind of sattami is called the locative in ablative-sense, 
which is found in the Pali canon. 
Examples of the Locative in Ablative sense: 

* kadalisu-from (eating) banana plants. gaje-the elephants. 

rakkhanti-(people) prevent. 

i.e. People prevent the elephants from eating banana plants. 


३१३, ३२७. कालभावेसु च 
3 13, 327. Kalabhavesu ca. [Kala, bhavesu*ca. 2 words] 


436 


Karaka Kappa 


[V] Kala, bhavesu ca kattari payujjamane sattamivibhatti hoti. 


When a subject is being engaged to time and action (of the 
two concurring incidences), a sattami vibhatti (locative 
case) is to be applied. 


Explanation 

When expressing two concurrent actions using time or action 
(an event) as a correlative marker, and with a subject being in- 
volved in the act, a sattami vibhatti is applied after the noun de- 
noting time, or action along with the corresponding subject or 
the object of the action. This Sutta enjoins to apply a sattami 
vibhatti after the subject or the object and the verb denoting 
coinciding action or event. In such a sentence, the verb is usually 
nta, mana or ta-suffixed Kita verbs though Akhyata verbs are 
sometimes used to express the last action out of the two concur- 
ring actions in a precise and simple manner. See the examples 
below carefully to understand this seemingly complex grammat- 
ical concept and its applied function in the practical sentence. 











Example of Kala-lakkhana 
(Time-definitive concurrent action) 
(1) * pubbanhasamaye-in the morning. gato-(he) went. (First action) 
e sayanhasamaye-in the evening. Agato-(he) comes. (Subsequent inci- 
dent) i.e. He went in the morning. In the evening, he came back. 


Example of Bhava-lakkhana 
(Action-definitive concurrent action) 


(1) ° bhikkhüsu-(when) the monks, ८७ ® bhojtyamanesu-(are still) eat- 
ing, clp. gato-(he) went, kv. i.e. When the monks are still eating, he 
went. * bhuttesu-having eaten (when they finished eating), clp. agato- 


(he) came back. kv. i.e. When having eaten, he came. (When the monks 
finished eating, he came back). 


(2) ° gosu-(when) cows. clp * duyhamanesu-(are being) milked. clp. 
gato-(he) goes, i.e. When the cows are still being milked, he goes. 


e duddhasu-when milked (when milking is done), clp. àgato-(he) 
came back. i.e. When having milked, he came. (When milking is done, 


437 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


he came back). 
Note: In these two examples, the present passive participle is 
used in the first incidence while the past passive participle is 
employed in the next incidence. Please note carefully this deli- 
cate mode of sentence structure. 


Lakkhana-Catukka 

(Lakkhana-quadriad) 
There are four Lakkhana-related things which all the students of 
Pali grammar should understand so that they will have a clear 
and comprehensive understanding of this grammatical concept. 
They are called lakkhana-catukka. Namely: 
(1) Lakkhana (the act of first marking) 
(2) Lakkhanavanta (lakkhana-correlative) 
(3) Lakkhya (the concurring act called “the marked") 
(4) Lakkhya-vanta (lakkhya-correlative) 


Of these four, 

(1) When an ongoing primary event and another secondary incidence are 
taking place at the same time, the primary event is used as a marker of the 
secondary event. Such act of marking is called “Lakkhana” by the 
ancient grammarians which means “the mark”. 

(2) Its correlative word, either it be a subject or an object that is syntactically 
related to it, is called ^Lakkhanavanta". 

(3) The secondary incidence, is termed “Lakkhya”. 

(4) Its correlative word, either it be a subject or an object, is called 
"Lakkhyavanta". 

The function of this Sutta is to apply sattami vibhatti (locative case) after 

*Lakkhana and Lakkhana-correlative", so that it becomes a complete and 

meaningful sentence when expressing two concurrent actions. 


Explanation 
Example: ® bhikkhüsu * bhojtyamanesu puriso gato. 
While or when the monks are eating, the man goes. 
[^puriso-man" is added for completeness's sake of the sentence] 
Here, the man's going incidence is marked by the primary event of the 
monks’ eating. 
(1) In the example above, the word “bhojiyamanesu” which indicates the 
primary event of the monk's eating, is Lakkhana by means of which the 


438 


Karaka Kappa 


man's going is marked. 

(2) The word “bhikkhisu” is its correlative object. Therefore, both are in the 
locative, plural case of sattami vibhatti. 

(3) the word “gato” which indicates the secondary action of man's going, is 
"Lakkhya". 

(4) The word “puriso” is its correlative which serves as a subject “goer”. 
These two words are inapplicable by the rule of this Sutta. 


The Injunction of Suttas 305, 313 

The Sutta 305 and 313 enjoins the two prevalent grammatical 
rules regarding the expression of two simultaneous actions, one 
based on the concept of “anadara” and the other based on time 
and action as definitive markers. Regardless of what has been 
explained in two Suttas, the students should know that there are 
also some methods of expressing two concurring incidences 
using relative pronouns and short sentences. The sentence 
structures based on the rules enjoined by these two Suttas 
are far more concise and needs less word. 

It should also be noted that even though there is no element of 
disrespect nor any definitive marker, one can still write the sen- 
tences based on the rules enjoined by these Suttas. Although it 
may at first seem a bit complex to the beginner, it is hoped that 
all the necessary simple explanation given thus far will suffice 
to make these two complex injunctions clear and simple to un- 
derstand. 


३१४, ३२८. उपध्याधिकिस्सरवचने 
314, 328. Upa'dhya'dhiki'ssaravacane. 
[Upa, adhi+adhika, issara, vacane. 2 words] 
[V] Upa, adhi-iccetesam payoge adhika,issara-vacane 
sattamivibhatti hoti. 


When used in the context of certain upasagga particles such 
as upa and adhi, meaning over and the lord respectively, a 
sattami vibhatti (locative case) is applied (to its correlative 
noun qualified by those upasaggas). 


439 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


Note: Upasagga words applied in the sentence have specific 
meanings which can thereby affect the case-ending of the nouns 
they are related to. See the case-endings of each example careful- 
ly to clearly understand this Sutta's function. 
(1) upa-(is) over, in excess. ® khàriyam-than a measure of “khari”. 
dono-a measure of *dona". 
i.e. A measure of “dona” is in excess of a “khari”. (A “dona” is more 


l9 


than a “khāri”). 
Note: “khari” and “dona” are measurement units of the grain in ancient 


India. 


(2) upa-(is) over, in excess. * nikkhe-than a measure of “nikkha”. 
kahapanarh-the measure of “kahapana”. 
i.e. A measure of “kahapana” is in excess of a "nikkha". 
(A “kahapana” is more than a *nikkha") 
Note: “nikkha” and “kahapana” are measurements of the monetary 
units in ancient India just as cents and dollar are common monetary 
units. 


(3) adhi-(is) the retinue. ® brahmadatte-of the king Brahmadatta. 
paficala-(the people) of Paficala. 
i.e. The people of Paficala are retinue of the king Brahmadatta. 
Note: Though this example is mostly found in the texts, “adhi 
brahmadatto paficalesu. i.e. The king Brahmadatta is the lord of 
the people of Paficala" is also applicable text. In the grammatical 
rule, the word denoting the lordship or dominancy is in nominative 
case and the word denoting the subject of lordship or “the domina- 
ted" is usually in the locative case. Comparing with next two exam- 
ples will clarify this fact which conform to this usage pattern and 
grammatical norm. 


(4) adhi-(is) the lord. * naccesu-over the dancers. gotami-(a lady 
named) Gotami. i.e. Gotami is the chief of all dancers. (She is the 
leader of the dance-ensemble). 

(5) adhi-(is) the lord. ° devesu-over all the celestial beings. 
buddho-the Lord Buddha. i.e. Buddha is the Lord over all celestial 
beings. 


440 


Karaka Kappa 


३१५, ३२९. मण्डितुस्सुक्केसु ततिया च 
315,329. Manditu’ssukkesu tatiya ca. 
[Mandita, ussukkesu+tatiyatca. 3 words] 
[V] Mandita,ussukka-icce’tesva’tthesu tatiyavibhatti hoti, 
sattami ca. 


When used in the context of the words mandita (being clear 
and unobstructed), ussukka (to strive, or being strenuous) or any 
other synonymous word, either tatiya (instrumental case) or 
sattami (locative case) is to be applied after the nouns re- 
lated to those words. 


Examples of the word “mandita” 
(Here, a synonymous word “pasidito” is used instead) 
(a) * hanena-by intellect. pasidito-(is) clear, unobstructed. 
i.e. (Buddha or his disciple are) clear or unobstructed by (in terms of) 
intellect. [tatiya example] 
(b) * fianasmim-in the intellect. va-to show other applicable case-ending. 
pasidito-(is) clear, unobstructed. [sattamr example] 


Examples of the word “ussuka” 
(a) ° hanena-by intellect. ussukko-(is) strenuous. 
i.e. (Buddha or his disciples are) strenuous by (in terms of) intellect. 
(b) * fianasmim-in intellect. va ussukko-(is) strenuous. 
tathagato và-either Buddha. tathagatagotto va-or the one in lineage 
of Buddha. i.e. a disciple. 
i.e. Either Buddha or Buddha's disciple are intellectually strenuous. 


Iti namakappe karakakappo chattho kando. 
Karaka Chapter, the Sixth Section of Noun ends. 


Karakakappo nitthito. 
Karaka Chapter ends. 


441 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


442 


Samasa Kappa 


4. Samàsa Kappa 
Samasa (Compound Noun) Chapter 
Sattama Kanda 
The Seventh Section of Noun 


३१६, ३३१. नामानं समासो युत्तत्थो 
316, 331. Namanar samaso yutta’ttho. 
[Namanarmh+samasotyuttattho. 3 words] 
[V] Tesam namànam payujjamanapada tthanam yo yutta'ttho, 
so samāsasañño hoti. 


Those nouns of the relevant and related meanings, when 
combined together, are called a Samāsa (compound noun). 
Summary: This Sutta clearly defines the nature of Samāsa 
and explains what a Samāsa is. It explains that combining 
two or more nouns of the relevant, related and coherent 
meanings is called a Samāsa (compound noun). 


० kathinadussam-the robe reserved for Kathina. 
[Kathina+dussa, two nouns are compounded in this example] 

e agantukabhattam-the food for guest. [agantuka-bhatta] 

० jivitindriyam-the faculty of life. 
[jivitatindriya] 

* samanabrahmana-monk and Brahmins. 
[samana+brahmana| 

* sariputtamoggalana-Venerable Sariputta and Venerable 
Moggalana. [sariputta+moggalana] 

* brahmanagahapatika-the Brahmin and house-holders. 
[brahmana+gahapatika] 

Namana’miti kimattham? 

What is the word “namanarh” for? 

To show that the examples shown below are nouns and 

verbs in a sentence, not nouns which are relevant to be 

combined in a Samasa process. So, there is no Samasa. 


devadatto-Devadatta. pacati-cooks. i.e. Devadatta cooks. 
yafifiadatto-yafifiadatta. pacati-cooks. i.e. Yafifiadatta cooks. 


443 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


Yuttattho'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “Yuttattho” for? [Yutta-related+attho- 
meaning] 

To show that there is no “yutattha, i.e. having related 
meaning which are mutually relevant to each other in a 
compound process" of the words in the sentence shown be- 
low. So, there is no Samasa. 

* bhato-servant. rafifio-of king. 

* putto-son. devadattassa-of Devadatta. 


Samáàsa-icca'nena kvattho? 

"Kvaci samasantagatana' makaranto". 

What benefit is there by terming "Samasa"? 

It has benefit of ease of reference in such Suttas as “Kvaci 
samasantagatana’makaranto” etc. 


३१७, ३३२. तेसं विभत्तियो लोपा च 

317, 332. Tesam vibhattiyo lopa ca. 
[Tesam+vibhattiyot+lopatca. 4 words] 

[V] Tesam yutta'tthanam samasanam vibhattiyo lopa ca honti. 


Those vibhattis applied after each component words during 
a compounding process of nouns, are to be elided (so that it 
becomes a complete compound noun with one single 
vibhatti). 

Summary: This Sutta enjoins elision of vibhatti (case- 
endings) and related things. Before it becomes a complete 
Samasa (compound) noun, there is a combining process of 
two or more nouns with different vibhattis (case-endings) 
which is called a viggaha sentence (विग्रहवाक्य) abbreviated as 
ED. All those different vibhattis and related morphological 
remnant morphemes which are present during viggaha pro- 
cess are required to be elided by injunction of this Sutta so 
that it will become a completed Samasa (compound noun) 
with one single vibhatti. Students will not fully understand 
the function of this Sutta unless they study the structural 


444 


Samasa Kappa 


morphology of words in grammar called “Payogasiddhi or 
Padasiddhi". [See the appendices Section] 


* kathinadussam, * agantukabhattam (meaning shown). 


Tesamgahanena samasa, taddhita’khyata, kitakanarh 
vibhatti, paccaya, pada'kkhara' gama ca lopa honti. 


By means of the word *tesam" in Sutta, all those vibhattis, 
affixes, morphemes, inserted words (agama) of Samasa 
nouns, any morpheme of Taddhita nouns, Akhyata verbs 
and Kita nouns, which has been component parts of the ED, 
can also be elided (as necessary). 

* Vasittho-Vasittha’s son. ० Venateyyo-Vinata’s son. 


Caggahana’mavadharana’ttham. 
The word “ca” in Sutta has a purpose of restricting the 


function of this Sutta in some examples shown below. (See 
that vibhatti ari in the preceding component word “Pabhan” of the 


[XX 


compound noun *Pabhankaro" is not elided. The “ñ” is a vagganta 
morpheme of am. This kind of compound is sometimes called “alutta 
samasa” where the vibhatti remains intact and is not elided as pre- 
scribed by this Sutta). 

e pabhan’karo-the light-maker, i.e. Sun. 

e amatan' dado-the giver of deathlessness, i.e. Buddha. 

° medhan’karo-the wisdom-maker, or a Buddha so-named. 

e dipan’karo-the wisdom-light-maker, or a Buddha so-named. 


३१८, 333. पकति चस्स सरन्तस्स 
318, 333. Pakati ca'ssa sara’ntassa. 
[Pakati+catassat+sarantassa. 4 words] 
[V] Luttasu vibhattisu assa sara'ntassa lingassa pakatiriipani 
honti. 


After the elision of vibhattis and other related things are 
done in the process of a compound noun (as per preceding 
Sutta), all that is left after elision, has to be kept as a “paka- 
ti". (Keep it as it is, to further carry out necessary proce- 
dures of finalizing as a complete compound noun word). 


445 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


e cakkhusotam-eye and ear. ° mukhanasikam-face and nose. 

* rajaputto-the king's son, i.e. the prince. 

* rajapuriso-the king's man, i.e. the royal staff. 

Note: The function of these two Suttas (317-318) are interrelated when 
performing morphological procedures. To clearly understand, please re- 
fer to the appendices section on the sample morphological procedures 
of a compound explained in this book. 


३१९, 330. उपसग्गनिपातपुब्बको अब्ययीभावो 

319, 330. Upasagganipatapubbako abyayibhavo. 
[Upasagga, nipata, pubbako-abyayibhàvo. 2 words] 

[V] Upasagga, nipatapubbako samaso abyayibhavasafitio hoti. 


A compound noun, when preceded by either an upasagga 
or a nipata particle, is called an “abyayibhava-adverbial 
compound". [See the examples carefully. Those shown in bold are 
upasagga or nipdta words]. 

Summary: This Sutta outlines the basic characteristics and 
nature of “Abyayibhava compound nouns" by explaining 
that any compound noun preceded in its structure by either 
an upasagga or a nipáta particle as the first component, is 
named “Abyayibhava compound". 

Note: Only those shown with this mark * are examples. The preceding 
words and phrases are called “viggaha” or etymological definition and 
expansion of example word abbreviated as ED. The first example is 
translated in detail along with its viggaha so as to make it more easily 
understandable for the students. 


(1) nagarassa samipe pavattati katha iti ° upanagaram, 
[Trans] Nagarassa-of the city. Samipe-in proximity. pavattati- 
is, arises. katha-the talk. i.e. The talk arises in proximity of (re- 
garding) city. iti-therefore. upanagararh-is called “upanagararh”, 
[This is the translation of ED, the unfinished compounding process 
of the words]. 

e upanagararm-the talk which happens near the city. i.e. the talk 
whose general nature is concerning the city. (This is the meaning of 
completed compound noun). [upa-near+nagaram-city. The talk re- 
lating to city] 


446 


Samasa Kappa 


(2) darathanam-of worries. abhavo-being absent. ° niddaratham- 
being absent of worries, i.e. worriless. [ni-without--daratharm- 
worry. one “d” reduplicated] 

(3) makasanam-of flies. abhavo * nimmakasarh-absent of flies, 
without flies, the fly-less. [ni-without+makasam-fly. one “m” redu- 
plicated] 

(4) vuddhanarh-of senior people. patipati-serial order. 
yathavuddham- in accordance with the seniority. 
[yatha-according to*vuddham-seniority] 

(5) ye ye-whosoever. vuddha-are senior. và-to explain in another 
way. 

* yathavuddham-whoever senior. 

(6) jivassa-of life. yattako-whatever. paricchedo-span. 

e yavajivam-for any span of life, i.e. for life. [yava-indefinite 
measure-tjivam-life] 

(7) citta! madhikicca [cittarn+adhikicca] pavattanti te 
dhamma'ti [dhamma-iti] ° adhicitta 
[cittarn-consciousness, mind. adhikicca-on account of. pavat- 
tanti-arise. te dhamma-those phenomena. i.e. Those phenomena 
which arise on account of mind. iti-therefore. 
adhicittam-is so called. 

* adhicittam-mind-related things. [adhi-related+cittarh-mind] 

(8) pabbatassa-of the mountain. tiro-other side, yonder. 

* tiropabbatarh-other side of the mountain. 
[tiro-beyond+pabbatam-mountain] 

(9) sotassa-of the flow. pati-against. pavattati-is. nàvà-the boat. 
i.e. The boat is against the current. 
iti-therefore. patisotarh-is so called. ® patisotam-The boat 
against the current. i.e. upstream-moving boat. 
[pati-against+sotarh-current] 

(10) pasadassa-of the mansion. anto-inside. ° antopasadam-the 
inside of mansion. [anto-inside*pasadam-mansion] 

Abyayibhava’micca’nena kvattho? 

Am vibhattina makaranta abyayibhava. 

What benefit is there by terming "abhyayibhàava"? 

It has benefit of ease of reference in such Suttas as “Arh 

vibhattina' makaranta abyayibhava" etc. 


447 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


३२०, ३३५. सो नपुंसकलिङ्गो 
320, 335. So napumsakalingo. 
[So+napurmsakalingo. 2 words] 
[V] So abyayibhavasamaso napumsakalingo'va datthabbo. 


That abyayibhava compound is to be regarded as belong- 
ing to the neuter gender. 

Summary: This Sutta defines the gender of *abyayibhava 
compounds" as being neuter gender. 


(1) kumarisu-in the girls. adhikicca-regarding. pavattati-arises. 
katha iti. 

* adhikumari-the talk regarding the girls. 
[adhi-relating to+kumari-girl] 

(2) vadhuya-of the daughter-in-law. samipe pavattati katha iti 
* upavadhu-the talk regarding the daughter-in-law. 
[upa-near-*vadu-daughter-in-law] 

(3) gangaya-of the river Ganges. samipe pavattati katha iti. 

e upagangam-the talk regarding the river Ganges. 
[upa-near^gangam-the river Ganges] 

(4) manikaya-of the big water pot. samipe pavattati katha iti. 
e upamanikam-the talk about big water-pot. 
[upa-near+manika-water-pot] 





३२१. ३४९. दिगुस्सेकत्तं 
32], 349 Digusse’kattam. [Digussa-*ekattam. 2 words] 
[V] Digussa samasassa ekattam hoti, napumsakalingattafi' ca. 


The “Digu” compound is to be recognized as of singular in 
number and belonging to neuter gender. 

Summary: This Sutta marks the gender and number of 
“Digu compound noun” as being of neuter gender and sin- 


gular in number. [Look at examples carefully to clarify this. All ex- 
amples end in an “arh” which is a derivative morpheme of nominative 


८८. 922 


singular “si”, a common characteristic pattern of neuter gender nouns] 


(1) tayo-the three. loka-worlds. ® tilokarh-three world (of human, 
heaven and Brahma, Gods' worlds). [ti-three+loka-world] 


448 


Samasa Kappa 


(2) tayo danda-sticks. ® tidandarh-three stick. [ti-three+danda- 
stick] 

(3) tini-three. nayanani-eyes. ® tinayanarh-three eye. 
[ titmayana-eye] 

(4) tayo singa-horns. ® tisingam-three horn. [ti*singa-horn] 

(5) catasso-four. disa-directions. * catuddisarh-four direction. 
[catu-four--disa-direction] 

(6) pafica-five. indriyani-faculties. ° paficindriyam-five faculty. 
[pafica-five+indriya-faculty] 


333, ३५९. तथा Set पाणितूरिययोग्गसेनङ्गखुद्वजन्तुकविविधविरुद्ध 
विसभागत्थादीनञ्च 
322, 359. Tatha dvande pani,tiriya,yogga,senanga, 
khuddajantuka,vividha viruddha, 
visabhaga’ttha’dinan’ca. 
[Tatha+dvande+pani, türiya, yogga, sena-anga, khuddajantuka, 
vividha viruddha, visabhaga-attha-adinamr-ca. 4 words] 
[V] Tatha dvande samase pani,tiriya,yogga,sena’nga, 
khuddhajantuka,vividhaviruddha, visabhaga’ ttha- 
icce'va'madinam ekattarh hoti napumsakalingattafi'ca. 


When bodily parts, musical instruments, farming tools, ac- 
cessories of military, small creatures, mutually hostile ani- 
mals, mutually distinctive virtues are expressed together, an 
expression of Dvanda compound can takes place and it is 
also to be regarded as neuter gender and singular in num- 
ber. 


Tam yatha? For example, 

(1) cakkhu-eye. ca-also, sotafi'ca [sotafica-sotam-ca. Refer to Sut- 
ta 31 to understand what happens to “m”] sotam ca-ear also, 
* cakkhusotam-eye and ear. 

(2) mukhafi' ca [mukhafica= mukharh+ca] mukham ca-mouth also, 
nasika ca-nose also, ° mukhanasikam-mouth and nose. 


Note: The a-ending neuter gender nouns in the nominative singular 
usually have a morpheme “arh”. So, they used to have this vagganta 


com 


function “fica” 


449 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


(3) chavi ca-skin also, marhsafi’ca [marhsafica= marhsarh+ca] lo- 
hitafi'ca [lohitafica= lohitarh+ca] mamsam ca-flesh also, lo- 
hitarh ca-blood also, * chavimarhsalohitarh-skin, flesh and 
blood. 

Evam panya’ngatthe. Thus, (are the examples regarding) parts of 

the body. 


(1) sankho-conch. ca-also, panavo-drum. ca-also, 
* sankhapanavarh-conch and drum. 
(2) gitafi' ca-singing also, vaditafi' ca-playing of musical instruments 
also, * gitavaditam-singing and playing of instruments. 
(3) daddari ca-a kind of drum named “daddari” also, dindimo ca-a 
small drum so-named also, 
e daddaridindimam-daddari drum and dindima drums. 
Evam türiya'ngatthe. Thus, are the examples regarding musical 
instruments. 


(1) phalo ca-plow also, pácanafi'ca [pacanafica=pacanarhtca] 
pacanarh ca-goad also, * phalapacanam-plow and goad. 

(2) yugani’ca [yugafica= yugar*ca] yugarhtca-yoke also, 
nangalafi'ca [nangalafica= nangalarn+ca] nangalarh ca-plough 
also, ० yuganangalam-yoke and plough. 

Evam yogga’hgatthe. Thus, are the examples regarding farming 

tools. 


(1) asi ca-sword also, cammafi'ca [cammafica- cammarhtca] 
cammar ca-skin-armor also, * aSicammath-sword and skin- 
armor. 

(2) dhanu ca-bow also, kalapo ca-quiver also, 

e dhanukalapam-bow and quiver. 

(3) hattht ca-elephant also, asso ca-horse also, * hatthiassam- 
elephant and horse. 

(4) ratho ca-chariot also, pattiko ca-infantry soldier also, 

e rathapattikam-chariot and infantry soldier. 

Evam sena? ngatthe. Thus, are the examples regarding military ac- 

cessories. 


450 


Samasa Kappa 


(1) damsa ca-gnat also, makasa ca-mosquitoes also, 
e damsamakasam-gnat and mosquito. 
(2) kuntho ca-ant also, kipilliko ca-termite also, 
e kunthakipillikarh-ant and termite. 
(3) kito ca-caterpillar also, sarisapo ca-scorpion also, 
e kitasarisapam-caterpillar and scorpion. 
Evam khuddajantuka'tthe. Thus, are the examples regarding 
small creatures. 


(1) ahi ca-snake also, nakulo ca-mongoose also, 
e ahinakulam-snake and mongoose. 

(2) bilaro ca-cat also, müsiko ca-rat also, 
* bilaramüsikarm-cat and mouse. 

(3) kako ca-crow also, ulüko ca-owl also, 
* kakolükam-crow and owl. 


Evam vividha-viruddha'tthe. Thus, are the examples regarding 
mutually hostile animals. 


(1) silafi'ca [silafi'ca-silam-ca] silam ca-morality also, 
pannanan’ca 
[pafifianaf’ca=pafifianarnt+ca] pannhanam ca-wisdom also, 
e silapafifianam-morality and wisdom. 

(2) samatho ca-samatha meditation also, vipassana ca-vipassanà 
meditation also, 
* samathavipassanam-samatha and vipassana meditation. 

(3) vijjà ca-knowledge also, caranafi’ca [caranafi’ca=caranarh+ca] 
caranam ca-virtuous practices also, 
* vijjacaranam-knowledge and virtuous practice. 


Evam visabhaga’tthe. Thus, are the examples regarding distinc- 
tive virtues. 


Adiggahanarn kimattham? 

What is the word "adi" for? 

Itis to show that the following examples of dvanda 
samasa (copulative compound) expressions are possible in 
many instances besides those explained herein. 


451 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


(1) dasi ca-female-slave also, daso ca-male-slave also, 
* dasidasam-female and male slave. 

(2) itthT ca-woman also, puma ca-man also, 

* itthipumam-woman and man. 

(3) patto ca-bowl also, civarafi'ca [civarafi’ca=civararntca] 
civaram ca-robe also, * pattacivaram-bowl and robe. 

(4) chattafi’ca [chattañ ca=chattarn+ca] chattam ca-umbrella also, 
upahana ca-slippers also, * chattu' pahanarh-umbrella and 
slipper. 

(5) tikafi'ca [tikafi’ca=tikarh+ca] tikam ca-triad also, catukkafi'ca 
[catukkañ’ ca-catukkarca] catukkarh ca-quadriad also, 

e tikacatukkam-triad and quadriad. 

(6) veno ca-bamboo-craftsman also, rathakaro ca-chariot-craftsman 
also, * venarathakaram-bamboo-craftsman and chariot-crafts- 
man. 

(7) sakuniko ca-bird-hunter also, magaviko ca-game-hunter also, 

e sakunikamagavikarh-bird-hunter and game-hunter. 

(8) digho ca-the long also, majjhimo ca-the medium also, 
e dighamajjhimarh-the long and the medium. 

icce’va’madi. 


333, 3&0. विभासा रुक्खतिणपसुधनधञ्जजनपदादीनञ्च 
323, 360. Vibhasa rukkha,tina,pasu,dhana,dhanna, 
janapada’ dinan’ ca. 
[Vibhasa+rukkha, tina, pasu, dhana, dhafifia, janapada- 
adinarn+ca. 3 words] 
[V] Rukkha,tina,pasu,dhana,dhafifa,janapada-icce’vamadinarh 
vibhasa ekattam hoti 
napurhsakalingattah’ca dvande samase. 


When expressing trees, grass, animals, wealth, grain, town 

and regions collectively, a dvanda samasa in singular num- 
ber sometimes can take place for that expression and it also 
belongs to neuter gender. 

Note: there are two examples in each. The first is of neuter gender, sin- 


gular. The second, accompanied by a nipdta word “vā”, is of plural. 


452 


Samasa Kappa 


a? 


The word “vibhasa” in Sutta is an equivalent of “va” which signifies in- 
consistency of the function of the Sutta. By the word “vibhasa”, it 
means that there will be some dvanda compound nouns which may end 
in plural, not only in singular as prescribed in this Sutta. 


(1) assattho ca-holy fig tree also, kapitano ca-pipal tree also, 

e assatthakapitanam-holy fig tree and pipal tree. [neuter, singu- 
lar] 
* assatthakapitana va [neuter, plural, the same meaning]. 

(2) usirafi'ca [usiraii’ca=usirarh+ca] usiram ca-a kind of grass 
named “usira” also, biranafi'ca [biranafi ca=bīraņarh+ca] 
biranam ca-a kind of grass named “birana’” also, 

* usirabiranam-“usira” and “birana” grass. 
* ustrabirana va. [neuter gender, plural] 

(3) ajo ca-goat also. elako ca-sheep also, ® ajelakam-goat and 
sheep. 

* ajelaka va. 

(4) hirafifiafi’ ca [hirafifiaf’ca=Hirafifiarn+ca] hirafifiam ca-silver 
also, Suvannan’ca [suvannafi'ca-suvannam-ca] suvannam ca- 
gold also, ® hirafifiasuvannarh-silver and gold. 

* hirafifiasuvanna va. 

(5) sali ca-rice, yavo ca-barley also, ® saliyavarh-rice and barley. 
* saliyava va. 

(6) kasi ca-the Kasi region also, Kosala ca-the Kosala region also, 

* kasikosalam-the Kasi and Kosala region. * kasikosala va. 

Adiggahanarn kimattharh? 

What is the word “adi” for? 

It has a purpose to show that the following examples of 

dvanda samasa expressions are possible in many instances 

in addition to those explained above in Sutta. 

(1) savajjafi'ca [savajjaii’ca=savajjarn+ca] savajjam ca-the blame- 
worthy thing (unwholesome) also, anavajjañ’ ca [anavajjaf’ca= 
anavajjarh+ca] anavajjam ca-the blameless thing (wholesome) al- 
so, 

e sàvajja navajjam-the blame-worthy thing and the blameless 
things (i.e. the unwholesome and wholesome thing). 


453 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


* savajja'navajja va. 

(2) hinafi'ca [hinafi’ca=hinarh+ca] hinarh ca-the lowly thing also, 
panitafi'ca [panitafi’ca=panitamnt+ca] panitam ca-the holy thing 
also, * hinapanitam-the lowly and the holy thing. 

* hinapanita va. 

(3) kanho ca-the black also, sukko ca-the white also, 

e kanhasukkam-the black and white. * kanhasukka va. 

Note: Suttas 322, 323 show the natural characteristic of *dvanda com- 

pound" nouns in two ways, one is that every dvanda has to apply a 

nipdta “ca” in its ED, and the other is that they used to be of neuter 

gender and singular. However, as an exception, there are also some 
dvanda compounds in plural case. 


३२४, ३३९. द्विपदे तुल्याधिकरणे कम्मधारयो 
324, 339. Dvipade tulya’dhikarane kammadharayo. 
[Dvipade+tulya-adhikarane+kammadharayo. 3 words] 
[V] Dve padani tulya'dhikaranani yada samasyante, 
tada so samaso kammadharayasaniio hoti. 


When two component nouns of the related meaning and of 
similar case-endings are combined together, it is then called 
a "kammadharaya-appositional compound". 

Summary: This Sutta defines the two chief characteristics 

of a “Kammadharaya” compound noun. They are: 

(1) having two component words to be compounded, 

(2) those words must be of tulyadhikarana, which means 
having the same base in terms of vibhatti as well as in 
terms of relevant meaning each word imply. 
[tulya-similar+adhikarana-base or position, being in apposition to 
each other in terms of having the same case ending, coherent mean- 
ing and syntactic as well as syntagmatic relation] 

To clarify this fact, take a closer look at its EDs shown 
below. There is a “९9” after each component word which 
mutually pulls two words together and a sabbanama 
noun “ta” shown by means of “so-that” which signifies 
the harmony and collateral relationship of the implied 


454 


Samasa Kappa 


meaning of the two words in addition to having the same 
vibhattis in nominative case. 


(1) mahanto ca-great also, so-that which is great, puriso ca’ti 
[ca+iti] puriso ca-(is) man also, iti-therefore, mahapuriso-it is 
called “mahapuriso”. ० mahapuriso-the great man. 

(2) kanho ca-black also, so sappo ca’ti sappo ca-snake also, 

* kanhasappo-the black snake. 

(3) nilafi'ca [Nilarh+ca] nilarh ca-blue also, tam-that, uppa- 
lafi’ca’ti [uppalarh+catiti] uppalam ca-lotus also, 
* niluppalam-the blue lotus. 

(4) lohitafi'ca [lohitarn+ca] lohitam-red, tam candanani’ca’ti 
[candanarh+catit] candanam-sandal wood. 

e lohitacandanam-the red sandal wood. 

(5) brahmant ca-female Brahmin, Sa-that woman, darika ca-girl, 
ca'ti * brahmanadarika-the Brahmin girl. 

(6) khattiya ca-a female of warrior (क्षत्रिय) caste, Sa kafina ca-girl, 
ca'ti. e khattiyakafina-the khattiya girl. 

Kammadharaya-icca'nena kvattho? 

What benefit is there by terming “kammadharaya’’? 

Kammadharayasanifie ca. 

It has the benefit of ease of reference in such Suttas as 

"Kammadharayasafifie ca” etc. 


३२५, ३४८. सक्क्यापुब्बो दिगु 
325, 348. Sankhyapubbo digu. 
[Sankhya-pubbo+digu. 2 words] 
[V] Sankhyapubbo kammadharayasamaso digusafirio hoti. 


A Kammadharaya compound noun, when preceded by the 
words of numerical values (i.e. a numerical noun), is called 
“digu-numeral appositional compound”. 

Summary: This Sutta simply and clearly defines the char- 
acteristic of “digu” compound by pointing to the fact that a 
Kammadharaya compound when preceded by a word of the 
numerical value in its combination is called “0120”. 


455 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


See both EDs and examples carefully to clarify this. 


(1) tini-three, malani-impurities. timalarh-three (kinds of) impuri- 
ties. [the word “mala” is of neuter gender] 

(2) tini phalani-fruits. ° tiphalam-three fruit. [phala is of neuter 
gender] 

(3) tayo loka * tilokarh. [loka is of masculine gender] 

(4) tayo danda ° tidandam. [danda is of masculine gender] 

(5) catasso disa * catuddisam. [disa is of feminine gender] 

(6) pafica indriyani ° paficindriyam. [indriya is of neuter gender] 

(7) satta-seven, godavariyo-Godavari rivers. * sattagodavaram- 
seven Godavari rivers. [The word Godavari is of feminine gender] 

Digu-icca'nena kvattho? Digusse'kattam. 

What benefit is there by terming “digu”? 

It has the benefit of ease of reference in Suttas like 

"Digusse'kattam" etc. 


३२६, ३४१. उभे तप्पुरिसा 
326, 341. Ubhe tappurisa. [Ubhe-tappurisa. 2 words] 


[V] Ubhe digu,kammadharayasamasa tappurisasafina honti. 


The two Digu, Kammadharaya samasas are called “Tap- 
purisa". 

Summary: This Sutta simply defines a combination of 
Digu and Kammadharaya as a Tappurisa when it is preced- 
ed by a negative particle nipata word “na” which means 
"not". See both EDs and examples carefully to clarify this. 


“na” morphs into either “a” or “an” later on when it be- 
comes a completed compound noun. (Refer to Sutta 333, 334 for 


८८,,११ 


changing into “a” or “an”). 


(1) na-not, brahmano-the Brahmin, ° abrahmano-non-Brahmin. 
i.e. the bogus Brahmin. 

(2) na vasalo-a wretch, vile person. * avasalo-not a wretch, 
i.e. noble. 

(3) na bhikkhu-monk, * abhikkhu-non-monk, i.e. bogus monk. 


456 


Samasa Kappa 


(4) na paficavassam-five year. * apaficavassam-not five years. 
[pafica-five--vassa-year] 

(5) na paficapüli-five packet. ० apaficapuli-not five packet. 
[pafica-five-puli-packet] 

(6) na sattagodavaram-seven Godavari rivers. 
* asattagodavaram-not seven Godavari rivers. 

(7) na dasagavam-ten cows. * adasagavarh-not ten cows. 
[dasa-ten+gava-cow] 

(8) na paficagavam-five cows. ० apaficagavarh-not five cows. 





Tappurisa-icca’nena kvattho? Attam nassa tappurise. 
What benefit is there by terming "tappurisa"? 
It has the benefit of ease of reference in such Suttas as “At- 


tam nassa tappurise" etc. 

Note: This Tappurisa is called Pathma Tappurisa (Tappurisa in nomina- 
tive case) as well as ubhe tappurisa (Tappurisa of dual nature as referred 
to in this Sutta) by Pali grammarians. In the Sanskrit grammars, it is 
called (नञ्‌ तपुरुष) by the Sanskrit grammarians. 


३२७, ३५१. अमादयो परपदेभि 
327, 351. A’madayo parapadebhi. 
[Am-adayo-parapadebhi. 2 words] 
[V] Tā a’madayo namehi parapadebhi yada samasyante, 
tada so samaso tappurisasaniio hoti. 


When those dutiya (accusative) “arn vibhatti" and similar 
vibhattis (except nominative and vocative) are joined with 
the other component words together, it is then called a 
“Tappurisa-Determinative compound” Samasa. 


Summary: This Sutta defines Tappurisa Samasa. When 
one of dutiya, tatiya, catutthi, paficami, chatthi, and 
sattami vibhattis are applied after the front component 
nouns with its corresponding component noun ending in 
nominative case, it is then called “Tappurisa Samasa". 
In a Tappurisa compound, the front component word usual- 
ly ends in one of these six vibhattis while the other compo- 











457 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


nent word ends in nominative. This is a basic structural pat- 
tern of most of Tappurisa compounds. Look at the EDs of 
examples shown below carefully. Each vibhatti applied af- 
ter the front word is clearly shown underlined in the ED of 
each example. If students are quite familiar with morpho- 
logical patterns explained in the Nouns section, they will 
understand the nature of this Samasa without much difficul- 


ty. 








[Dutiya Tappurisa] 
am" after the front component word, shown underlined, 
is indicative of the accusative case, singular] 
(1) bhümim-to the earth, gato-goer, ० bhümigato-the earth-goer. 
i.e. the one who walks on earth. 
(2) sabbarattim-for the whole night, sobhano-beautiful, 
* sabbarattisobhano-beautiful for the whole night. 
(3) apayam-to four apayas, gato-goer, gone, * apayagato-the one who 
has gone to apayas (woeful states). 


59 ८८ 


“h 


[Tatiya Tappurisa] 
“ena” behind the front component word 
is indicative of the instrumental case, singular. Re: Sutta 103] 
(1) issarena-by powerful, katarh-done, ® issarakatarh-done by powerful, 
an act done by a person of authority, or God-made if Issara-means God. 
(2) sallena-by arrow, viddho-hurt, penetrated, * sallaviddho-hurt or 
penetrated by arrow, a person hit by arrow. 


[Catutthi Tappurisa] 
[“ssa” behind the front component word 
is indicative of the dative case, singular. Re: Sutta 61] 


(1) kathinassa-for Kathina, dussam-(designed & offered) robe, 
* kathinadussam-Kathina-robe. 

(2) agantukassa-for the guest, bhattarh-reserved food, 
* agantukabhattam-the guest-food. 


458 


Samasa Kappa 


[Paficami Tappurisa] 
[^a" behind the front component word 
is indicative of the ablative case, singular. Re: 108] 
(1) methuna-from sexual intercourse, apeto-abstaining, 
* methunapeto-abstinence from the sexual intercourse. 
(2) cora-from thief, bhayarh-fear, ० corabhayarh-fear of thief. 
[Chatthr Tappurisa] 
[For “rafifio”, re: Sutta 135. “nar” behind the front component word 
is indicative of the genitive case, plural] 
(1) rafifio-of king, putto-son, * rajaputto-the king's son. i.e. the prince. 
(2) dhafifianarh-of grains, rasi-heap, ° dhafifiarasi-the heap of grain. 
[Sattami Tappurisa] 
[“e” behind the front component word 
is indicative of the locative case, singular. Re: 108] 
(1) rüpe-in the form, sanna-concept, ® rüpasafifia-the form-concept. 
(2) samsare-in the Samsara, dukkharh-suffering, 
e samsaradukkhamr-suffering of the Samsara. 


३२८, ३५२. अञ्ञपदत्येसु बहुब्बीहि 
328, 352. Afiiapada'tthesu bahubbthi. 
[Afiiapada-atthesut+bahubbihi. 2 words] 
[V] Afiesam padanam atthesu dve namani bahüni va namani 
yada samasyante, tada so samaso bahubbthi-safiio hoti. 


When the meaning of (an external) other word is predomi- 
nant in a combination of two or more nouns, it is then 
called a “Bahubbthi-attributive compound”. 


Summary 

When an external sabbanama noun word, such as “ya, ima” 
etc. rather than component words included in the compound, 
plays a dominant role in determining the qualified collective 
meaning of the completed compound noun, it is then called a 
“Bahubbthi” Samasa compound. 

To clarify this, please refer to the first example “Agatasamano” 
shown below. In it, the collective meaning of complete com- 


459 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


pound as a whole is not the coming monks as implied by two 
component words “agata and samana", but the temple where the 
monks had arrived which is shown by the external word “ima 
(imam)" in the ED. That external word is called “aññapada” and 
the meaning of it is known as "afifiapadattha". This meaning is 
usually a predominant character of the whole Bahubbrhi com- 
pound when completed no matter how short or how long it may 
be. In the end of most examples shown in this grammar, the 
"afifiapadattha" of each Bahubbthi compound is directly indi- 


cated by the great grammarian himself. [Añña-other+pada- 
word+attha-meaning. i.e. the meaning of other word.] 


Why it is called *Bahubbihi"? 
Because any compound noun in this category of compounds has 
the same nature of having the same implied meaning of an ex- 


ternal, foreign word like the word *bahubbihi". [bahu-much, abun- 
dant+vihi-rice. Here, it does not literally mean “the abundant rice" as meant 
by the combination of these two words, but it only means a district where 
the rice is abundant. | 


How many kinds of "Bahubbihi" are there? 

Basically, there are altogether seven kinds of Bahubbihi which 
are determined based on the vibhatti (case-ending) being applied 
after an "afifiapada-(1.e. the other foreign word) such as ya, ta, 
eta and ima". They are: pathama, dutiya, tatiya, catutthi, 
paficami, chatthi and sattami. (7) 


Note: There are other forms of Bahubbthi as explained by emi- 
nent Pali grammarian Buddha piya'cariya, the author of 
Ripasiddhi-vyakarana. However, all those forms, despite 
some slight differences, are also based on the case-ending of 
afilapada. The vibhatti-based classification is much easier to 
learn and remember for the beginners in the beginning process. 
Therefore, a student needs to carefully look out for what vibhatti 
case-ending is applied after an "afifiapada" in the ED of a “Ba- 
hubbihi compound". By knowing its vibhatti case-ending, they 


460 


Samasa Kappa 


will be able to determine it according to its case-ending. This 
will not be quite difficult if a student has already studied the 
nouns chapter very well as all the chapters of grammar, ex- 
cept Sandhi and Akhyata, are mostly nouns in various forms. 
For the ease of study, all the case-endings of afifiapada will 
be shown in bold, underlined in the ED of each compound 
with the exception of its correlative word located next to it 
which have the same vibhatti case-ending throughout this 
Bahubbihi section. This way, the students will easily notice and 
clearly understand its relevant category according to its vibhatti 
case-ending. 


How long a *Bahubbihi" compound can be? 

It rather depends on how many different kinds of word are to be 
joined into a would-be Bahubbthi compound until it becomes a 
completed Bahubbihi. Before it becomes a Bahubbthi, all the 
different words are to be first joined into relevant compounds 
such as Tappurisa, Kammadharaya, Dvanda and so on. It is very 
interesting to study this compounding process till it becomes a 
complete Bahubbihi compound. In the forthcoming pages, dif- 
ferent Bahubbthi compounds, some quite long, some longer and 
some being the longest, will be shown and explained. The stu- 
dents will even see some long Bahubbthi compounds with the 
beautiful poetic expressions of idyllic nature coupled with the 
spiritual element of undying respect and pure devotion toward 
the Buddha, the appreciation of spiritual life of the forest- 
dwelling ascetics, masterfully woven together by the great 
grammarian Maha Kaccayana. 


Agatasamano 
[agata-those arrived, came+samana-monk. “o” is the derivative of “si”] 
agata-had come. samanà-monks. imarh-to this. sahgharamarh-monk’s 
place, monastery. i.e. The monks had come to this monastery. 
so'yam [so’yarn=sotayarh] so-that. ayam-this place. 
agatasamano-is called *agatasamano". [The meaning of the whole ED] 


461 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


[the meaning of completed Samasa] * agatasamano-the monastery where 
the monks came. i.e. have arrived. This is a dutiya Bahubbihi compound. 
The temple is afifiapadattha or the exact final sense of the whole compound. 
sangharamo-“the monastery where the monks have come to" is to be taken 
as "agatasamano". 

Note: so'yam is a redundant use of two sabbanama words “ta” and “ima”. 
The meaning has to be either "that or this". Sometimes it is quite similar to 
emphatic usage of “this very place" in the English language. 


Jiti’ndriyo 
[jita-conquered+indriya-faculty] 
jitani-had conquered. indriyani-faculties (i.e. eye etc.) anena-by this. 
samanena-monk. i.e. Faculties are conquered by this monk. 

so'yam-that monk. jitin’driyo-is called “jitindriyo”. 

e jitin’driyo-the monk who has conquered (his own) faculties. i.e. the 
monk who can restrain his senses completely. [This is a tatiya Bahubbihi 
compound]. [afiriapadattha] samano-the monk is to be taken or regarded as 
“jitindriyo”. 


Dinnasunko 

[dinna-paid--sunka-revenue] 
dinno-had been given, paid (by people). sunko-revenue or tax. yassa-of 
whom. rafifio-of the king. i.e. the king for whom the revenue is paid 
by people. so’ yarh-that king. dinnasunko-is called “dinnasunko”, 
* dinnasunko-the king who has revenues paid by people. [This is a Catut- 
thi Bahubbihi compound]. [afifiapadattha] raja-the king is to be taken as the 
meaning of this compound noun. 


Niggatajano 
[niggata-departed--jana-people] 
niggata-had come out. jana-people. asma-from that. gam4-from village. 
i.e. people had come out from that village. so’ yarh-that village. 
niggatajano-is called “niggatajano”, * niggatajano- the village from 
where people left. [This is a Paficami Bahubbthi compound]. [afifiapadattha] 
gamo-the village is the meaning of this compound noun. 


462 


Samasa Kappa 


Chinnahattho 
[chinna-cut, amputated+hattha-hand] 
chinno-is cut. hatto-hand. yassa-of which, whose. purisassa-man. i.e. 
the man whose hand is cut. so'yam-that man. chinnahattho-is called 
“chinnahattho”, ० chinnahattho-the man whose hand is cut (amputated). 
[This is a Chatthr Bahubbthi compound]. [afifiapadattha] puriso-the ampu- 
tee man is to be regarded as the directly implied meaning of this compound. 


Sampannasasso 

[sampanna-abundant+sassa-rice] 
sampannani-(are) abundant. sassani-the rice, paddy. yasmirh-in which, 
where. janapade-district. i.e. the district where the rice plants or paddy are 
abundant and thriving. so’ yam-that district. sampannasasso-is called 
“sampannasasso”. ० sampannasasso-the district where the rice is abun- 
dant. [This is a Sattami Bahubbthi compound]. [afifiapadattha] janapado- 
the district is to be taken as the meaning of this compound noun. 


Nigrodhaparimandalo 
[nigrodha-banyan tree+parimandala-circle, diameter] 
(1) nigrodhassa-of banyan tree. parimandalo-circumference. 
* nigrodhaparimandalo-the circumference of banyan tree. 
[Chatthi Tappurisa compound] 

(2) nigrodhaparimandalo iva-(is) like the circumference of banyan tree. 
parimandalo-(the proportionate) bodily figure. yo-whosoever. raja- 
kumaro-the prince. i.e. the prince who has body-figure like that of a ban- 
yan tree. So’ yath-that prince. nigrodhaparimandalo-is called “nigro- 
dhaparimandalo". [This is a Pathama Bahubbihi compound]. 

* nigrodhaparimandalo- the prince who has the proportionate, shapely 
bodily figure like that of a banyan tree. 


atha va-(Here is to explain this compound in) other method: 
nigrodhaparimandalo iva-like the circumference of banyan tree. 
parimandalo-(the proportionate) bodily figure. yassa-whose. raja- 
kumarassa-of the prince. i.e. the prince, whose proportionate bodily figure 
is like that of symmetrically shaped Banyan tree. So’ yam ° nigrodhap- 


arimandalo- the prince whose proportionate, shapely bodily figure is like 
that of a banyan tree. [This is a Chattht Bahubbihi compound. Catutthi is 


463 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


also possible] [afifiapadattha] rajakumaro-the prince is to be taken as the 
meaning of this compound noun. 

Note: iva and viya are two nipata particles which mean “like”. In this second 
method ED, a genitive case is applied after aññapada. 


Cakkhubhüto 
[cakkhu-eye-*bhüto-that was, that has arisen] 
(1) cakkhuno-of the eye. bhüto-the arisen nature. ० cakkhubhüto-the 
arisen nature of eye. [Chatthi Tappurisa compound] 
(2) cakkhubhüto iva-like the arisen nature of eye. bhüto-has arisen. 
yo-whosoever. bhagava-the lord Buddha. i.e. The lord Buddha has arisen 
like the eye. So’ yath-that lord Buddha. cakkhubhüto-is called *cakkhub- 
hüto". ० cakkhubhüto-The lord Buddha who has arisen (like the guiding) 
eye of the worldlings. [This is a Pathama Bahubbthi compound]. 
[afifiapadattha] bhagava-The Lord Buddha is to be taken as the meaning of 
this compound noun. 
Note: This term “bhiito” means only a state, a condition. e.g. Cakkhubhüto- 
being like an eye. Manussabhüto-being a human. 


Suvannavanno 
[suvanna-gold+vanna-color] 

(1) suvannassa-of the gold. vanno-color. ० suvannavanno-the gold’s 
color. [Chattht Tappurisa] 

(2) suvannavanno viya-(is) like the gold's color. vanno-the skin com- 
plexion. yassa bhagavato-of the lord Buddha. so’ yam suvanna- 
vanno-is called “suvannavanno”. ° suvannavanno-the Lord Buddha 
whose skin complexion is like that of gold. [This is a Chatthi Bahubbthi 
compound. The Catuttht is also applicable]. 

[afifiapadattha] bhagava-The Lord Buddha is to be taken as the meaning 
of this compound noun. 


Brahmassaro 
[brahma-Brahma, i.e. God+sara-voice. One “5” is augmented] 
(1) brahmuno-of Brahma. saro-the voice. ० brahmassaro-The 
Brahma’s voice. [Chatthi Tappurisa] 
(2) brahmassaro viya- like the Brahma’s voice. Saro-the voice. yassa- 
whose. bhagavato-of Lord Buddha. so'yam. brahmassaro-is called 
Brahmassaro. * brahmassaro-The Lord Buddha whose voice is like that 


464 


Samasa Kappa 


of Brahma’s voice. [This is a Chatthi Bahubbthi compound. Catutthr is 
also applicable]. 

[afifiapadattha] bhagava-The Lord Buddha is to be taken as the meaning 
of this compound noun. 


Sayarı patita panna pupphaphalavayutoya? hara 
[sayam-self. patita-fallen. panna-leave. puppha-flower. phala-fruit. vayu- 
air. toya-water. ahara-food.] 

“Sayarı patita panna pupphaphalavayutoya' hara" 

In this long Bahubbthi compound noun, how the graduated series of relevant 
compounds are first combined in order to become a final Bahubbihi Samasa 
will be explained step by step by joining different words into applicable 
compounds according to their relevant meaning and correlation of each word. 
Here, it will be seen that there are five, separate compounds occurred ac- 
cording to the relevant and coherent meanings of each word, being combined 
into various appropriate compounds. Please study carefully. 


“Sayarı patita panna pupphaphalavayutoya'hara"ti- 
Now, this compound containing above “Sayarı patita panna pupphaphala- 


vayutoya' hara" words, will be explained (on how it finally becomes a per- 
fect Bahubbthi after combining various words into relevant compounds): 


(1) pannafi’ca-leave also, pupphafi' ca-flower also. phalafi’ca-fruit 
also. * pannapupphaphalani-the leaves, flowers and fruits. 
[This is a dvanda, copulative compound. See “ca” in the ED] 

(2) saya’ meva [saya’meva=sayarh+eva] patitani ° sayampatitani, 
sayam-itself. eva-only. patitani-fallen. sayampatitani-fallen itself. 
[Kammadharaya. Due to usage of a nipdta particle “eva-only”, it is 
called “ava-dharana Kammadharaya compound” 

(3) sayampatitani ca tani pannapupphaphalani ce'ti 
e sayampatitapannapupphaphalani [Kammadharaya] 
sayampatitani ca-fallen itself also. tani-those fallen. pannapupphaphalani 
ce'ti [ceti=ca+ti] pannapupphaphalani ca-(are) leaves, flowers and fruits. 
sayarhpatitapannapupphaphalani-self-fallen leaves, flowers and fruits. 

(4) vayu ca toyafi'ca [toyarhtca] ° vayutoyani. [Dvanda Compound] 
vayu ca-air also. toyarh ca-water also. * vayutoyani-air and waters. 

(5) sayampatitapannapupphaphalani ca-self-fallen leaves, flowers, 
fruits also. Vayutoyani ca-air and waters also. 

e sayampatitapannapupphaphalavayutoyani-self-fallen leaves, 
flowers, fruits, air and waters. [Dvanda Compound] 


465 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


(B) sayampatitapannapupphaphalavayutoyani-self-fallen leaves, 
flowers, fruits, air and waters. ahara-(are) foods or nourishments. yesam- 
whose. te-they. sayampatitapannapupphaphalavayutoyahara-are 
called *sayampatitapannapupphaphalavayutoyahara". 

e sayampatitapannapupphaphalavayutoya' hara-the hermits whose 
foods are self-fallen (natural) leaves, flowers, fruits and air, waters. [aiifiapa- 
dattha] isayo-(the forest-living) hermits are to be taken as the final sense of 
this compound. 

Ya’mettha [ya’mettha=yarh+tettha] yarh-whatever. ettha-here (regarding 
the nature of this Bahubbrhi compound) vattabbam-should be said. tarh- 
that. hettha-below (i.e. previously). vutta’meva [vuttarn+eva]. 
vuttam-(I have already) said. eva-only. i.e. Whatever should be said on the 
nature of this compound, had already been said before in the beginning of 
Sutta. ayam-this compound noun. pana-a nipáta with no meaning. dvan- 
da,kammadharaya,gabbho-dvanda and Kammadharaya compounds 
concealed inside. tulya? dhikaranabahubbthi-(is called) tulyadhi- 
karanabahubbthi compound. [This is so-called because the two words, 
sayampatitapannapupphaphalavayutoyani and ahara have the same case- 
endings in the nominative plural]. 


atha va—Here is another method of combining: 
sayampatitapannapupphaphalavayutoyehi-by (means of consuming) 
self-fallen leaves, flowers, fruit, (fresh) air and waters. ahara-(daily) foods. 
yesam-of whom. i.e. the daily foods of whom are by means of consuming 
self-fallen leave, flowers, fruit, fresh air and waters. te-they. sayampatita- 
pannapupphaphalavayutoyahara-are called “sayarhpatitapannapup- 
phaphalavayutoyahara ”. 

e sayarhpatitapannapupphaphalavayutoya’hara-the hermits whose 
foods are by means of self-fallen leaves, flowers, fruit, (fresh) air and waters. 
Note: There is a slight difference in translation of this completed compound 
as it has to be translated in strict accordance with the second ED. 
ayam pana-this Bahubbihi compound. 
bhinna’dhikaranabahubbihi-is called bhinna’dhikaranabahubbihi. 


Note: “B” means Bahubbthi. 

This is called bhinna’dhikaranabahubbthi because the two words, one 
"sayampatitapannapupphaphalavayutoyehi" and the other *ahara" have 
different case-endings, one in instrumental and the other in nominative plural. 


466 


Samasa Kappa 


Please refer to Sutta 292 for explanation regarding these two words 
Tulya'dhikarana and bhinna’dhikarana. [bhinnatadhikarana] 


Nana dumapatita pupphavasita sanu 
[nana-various. duma-tree. patita-fallen. puppha-flower. vasita-scented. 
sanü-hill-surface of the peak] 

Nana dumapatita pupphavasita sanü'ti-Now, it will be explained 

this Bahubbihi which contains above words: 

(1) nana pakara-various kinds of. duma-trees. ° nanaduma-various 
kinds of trees. [Kammadharaya] 

(2) nanadumehi-from various trees. patitani-fallen. ° nanadumap- 
atitani-fallen from various trees, [Paficami Tappurisa] 

(3) nanadumapatitani ca-fallen from various tree also. tani-those fallen. 
pupphani ce’ti [catiti] pupphani ca-are flowers also. iti-therefore. 
nanadumapatitapupphani-is called “nanadumapatitapupphani”. 

* nanadumapatitapupphani-flowers fallen from various-trees. 
[Kammadhiaraya] 

(4) nanadumapatitapupphehi-by flowers fallen from various trees. 
vasita-are scented. * nanadumapatitapupphavasita-scented by the 
flowers fallen from various trees. [Tatiya Tappurisa] 

(B) nanadumapatitapupphavasita-(is) scented with flowers fallen from 

various trees. Sanu-the level surface of mountain peak. yassa-of which. 

pabbatarajassa-mountain king (i.e. great mountain). So’ yarh-that peak. 
nanadumapatitapupphavasitasanu-is so-called. 

* nanadumapatitapupphavasitasanu-the mountain peak which is 
scented with flowers fallen from various trees. [This is a Chatthi Bahubbthi 
compound. Catuttht is also applicable] 

[afifiapadattha] pabbataraja-the great mountain (whose peak is fragrant) is 

to be regarded as the final meaning of this compound. 

ayam pana kammadharaya,tappurisa,gabbho tulyadhikara- 

nabahubbthi-This Bahubbihi is a tulyadhikaranabahubbihi with 

kammadharaya, tappurisa concealed inside. 

atha và—Here is another method: 

(1) vasita-the scented. sanü-mountain peak. * vasitasanu-the scented 
peak. [Kammadharaya] 

sa'pekkhatte sati’pi gamakatta samaso. 


467 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


Despite having different syntactical relation of the word “vasita” to an exter- 
nal word “pupphehi” (see next procedure), there is Bahubbrhi Samasa process 
as the implied meaning is still relevant and related between “vasita” and 
“sānu”. [This is an explanation of some subtle complexity in the foregoing 
ED. In the next examples, this statement will be left untranslated]. 
sa'pekkhatte-sa*apekkha-tte-being syntactically related. sati? pi=satitapi- 
despite. gamakatta-gamaka-tta-due to understandability. gamaka doesn’t 
mean “to go". Here, it means “to easily know". 

(B) nanadumapatitapupphehi-with flowers fallen from various trees. 
vàsitasanü-scented peak. yassa-of which. pabbatarajassa-great moun- 
tain. i.e. The great mountain whose peak is scented with flowers fallen from 
various trees. SO’ yam-that peak. nanadumapatitapupphavasitasanu-is 
so-called. 


* nanadumapatitapupphavasitasanu-The great mountain whose peak is 
scented with flowers fallen from various trees. 
[afifiapadattha] pabbataraja-the king of mountains, i.e. the great mountain. 


ayam pana bhinna'dhikaranabahubbihi. 
This is a bhinna’dhikarana bahubbihi. 


Vya’lamba’mbudharabinducumbitakito 
[vyalamba-variously hanging. ambudhara-rain-cloud. bindu-drop. cum- 
bita-sprayed, kissed. küto-mountain-peak] 
Vya’lamba’mbudharabinducumbitakito’ti—Now, it will be ex- 
plained this Bahubbthi which contains these words: 

(1) amburh-the water. dharetr'ti [dhareti’ti=dhareti+iti] dhareti-carries. 
iti-therefore. ambudharo-is so called, * ambudharo-the water- 
carrying. [dutiya Tappurisa] ko-what. so-that? What is that? Pajjun- 
no-the rain clouds (are called ambudharo). 

Note: This word is called *samudaya'ttha-ekavacana", collective singular 

though it may mean many clouds. [ambu-water+dhara-to carry, carrier] 

(2) vividha-by various ways. alambo-is hanging (dangling in the sky) 

e vya’ lambo-hanging variously. [vyalambo-vi-variously--alambo- 
hanging in the sky] [Kammadharaya] 

(3) vya'lambo ca-variously hanging also. SO-that hanging thing. am- 
budharo ca’ti [ca+iti] ambudharo ca-(is) the water-carrying rain- 
cloud. iti-therefore. vyalambambudharo-is so-called. 

e vya’lambambudharo-The variously hanging, water-carrying rain- 
cloud. [Kammadharaya] 


468 


Samasa Kappa 


(4) vya'lambambudharassa-of variously hanging, water-carrying rain 
cloud, bindü-drops. * vya'lambambudharabindü-the rain-drops of 
variously hanging, water-carrying cloud. [Chatthi Tappurisa] 

(5) vya'lambambudharabindühi-by the rain-drops of variously hang- 
ing, water-carrying clouds. cumbito-sprayed, kissed. 

e vyà'lambambudharabinducumbito-sprayed or kissed by the rain- 
drops of variously hanging, water-carrying clouds. [Tatiya Tappurisa] 

(B) vya'lambambudharabinducumbito-(is) sprayed or kissed by the 

rain-drops of variously hanging, water-carrying cloud, küto-the peak. yas- 

sa-of which. pabbatarajassa-great mountain. so" yarh-that peak. 

vyà' lambambudharabinducumbitaküto-is so-called. 

e vyà'lambambudharabinducumbitaküto-the peak which is sprayed or 

kissed by the rain-drops of variously hanging, water-carrying clouds. 

ayam pana kammadharaya,tappurisagabbho 

tulya’dhikaranabahubbihi. 

This Bahubbthi is a tulya’dhikaranabahubbthi with kammadharaya, tap- 

purisa compounds concealed inside. 

atha va—Here is another method of combining into necessary Samasa: 

(1) cumbito-the sprayed. küto-peak. « cumbitaküto-the sprayed peak. 
[Kammadhiaraya] 

sa’ pekkhatte sati’pi gamakatta samaso. 

(B) vya'lambambudharabindühi-by drops of variously hanging, water 

carrying rain-clouds. cumbitaküto-the sprayed peak. yassa-of which. 

pabbatarajassa-great mountain. so’ yam-that peak. 
vya’lambambudharabinducumbitaktito-is so-called. 


e vya’lambambudharabinducumbitaktto-the mountain whose peak is 
sprayed by the drops of variously hanging, water-carrying rain-clouds. 


ayarı pana bhinna'dhikaranabahubbihi. 
This Bahubbthi is a bhinna' dhikaranabahubbthi. 


469 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


Amitabalaparakkamajuti 
[amita-immeasurable. bala-strength. parakkama-effort. juti-light, or glory] 
Amitabalaparakkamajutt? ti—Now, it will be explained this Bahubbihi 
which contains these words: 

(1) na-not (negative particle). mita-measurable. ० amita-immeasurable. 
[Ubhe Tappurisa, also known as Kammadhiaraya] 

(2) balafi’ca [balarn+ca] balam ca-strength also. parakkamo ca-effort 
also. juti ca-glory also. ० balaparakkamajutiyo-strength, effort and 
glories. [Dvanda] 

(B) amità-(are) immeasurable. balaparakkamajutiyo-strength, effort 

and glories. yassa-of whom. so'yam-that Buddha. 

amitabalaparakkamajuti-is so called. 


* amitabalaparakkamajuti-The Buddha whose strength, effort and 
glories are immeasurable. 
ayam pana kammadharaya,dvandagabbho 


tulya’dhikaranabahubbihi. 
This Bahubbthi is a tulya’dhikaranabahubbihi with kammadharaya, 
dvanda compounds concealed inside. 


Pino’rakkha’msabahu 
[pina-full, i.e. having attractively plump body-mass. ura-chest. akkha-collar 
bones. arhsa-shoulder. bahü-arms] 
Pino’rakkha’msabahv’ti-Now, it will be explained this Bahubbihi 
which contains these *Prno?rakkha?msa bahu" words: 
(1) uro ca-chest also. akkhafi'ca [akkarh+ca] akkharh ca-collar bone 
also. amso ca-shoulder also. bahu ca-arm also. 
* ura’kkha’ msabahavo-chest, collar-bone, shoulder and arms. 
[Dvanda] 
(B) prnà-(are) full, plump. urakkh'amsabahavo-chest, collar-bone, 
shoulder and arms. yassa-whose. bhagavato-Lord Buddha. so’ yarh- that 
Buddha. pino'rakkha"msabahu-is so-called. 


* pino'rakkha' msabahu-The Buddha whose chest, collar-bone, shoulder 
and arms are full (with appropriate body-mass, being plump). 


ayam pana dvandagabbho tulya'dhikaranabahubbihi. 
This Bahubbthi is a tulya’dhikaranabahubbthi with dvanda inside. 


470 


Samasa Kappa 


Pina ganda vadana thanu’ru jaghana 

[pina-full. ganda-cheek. vadana-mouth. thanu-breast. üru-thigh. jaghana- 

waist] 

Pinagandavadanathanü' rujaghana'ti-Now, it will be explained 

this Bahubbthi which contains these *Prpagandavadanathanü'rujaghana" 

words: 

(1) gando ca-cheek also. vadanafi' ca [vadanarh+ca] vadanam ca- 
mouth also. thano ca-breast also. Uru ca-thigh also. jaghanail'ca [ja- 
ghanarh+ca] jaghanarh ca-waist also. 

e gandavadanathanü' rujaghanà-cheek, mouth, breast, thigh and waists. 
[Dvanda compound] 

(B) pina-(are) full, plump. gandavadanathanü'rujaghana-cheek, 

mouth, breast, thigh and waists. YaSSa-of whose (woman). sa’ yam 

[sa*ayam] Sa ayarh-that woman. pinagandavadanathanü'rujaghana- 

is so called. 

e pinagandavadanathanü rujaghanà-the woman whose cheek, mouth, 

breast, thigh and waists are (attractively) full, plump. 


ayam'pi [ayarh-thistapi-also, too] 
dvandagabbho tulya’dhikaranabahubbihi. 


This Bahubbthi too is a tulya’dhikarana bahubbthi with a dvanda hidden 
inside. 


Pavara sura’sura garuda manuja bhujaga gandhabba makuta 
kita cumbita sela sanghattita carano 

[pavara-noble. sura-gods. asura-demons. garuda-mythical birds (griffon). 

manuja-human. bhujaga-dragons. gandhabba-celestial artiste. makuta- 

crown. kiita-peak. cumbita-fixed. sela-precious-stones, sanghattita- 
touched. carano-feet] (* This Bahubbihi compound noun is the longest 
one). 

Pavara sura’sura garuda manuja bhujaga gandhabba ma- 

kuta kita cumbita sela sanghattita carano'ti- 

Now, it will be explained this Bahubbthi which contains the words *Pavara" 

etc. 

(1) surà ca-gods also. asura ca-demons. garuda ca-garuda birds. ma- 
nujà ca-humans. bhujaga ca-dragons. gandhabba ca-celestial artiste 
also. * sura’ suragarudamanujabhujagagandhabba-gods, demons, 
garuda birds, humans, dragons and celestial artistes. 

[Dvanda compound] 


471 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


(2) pavara ca-(are) noble. te-those noble ones are. 
sura’ suragarudamanujabhujaga gandhabba ca-gods, demons, 
garuda birds, humans, dragons and celestial artistes. ceti [ceti-ca-iti] 

* pavarasura’ suragarudamanujabhujagagandhabba-the noble 
gods, demons, garuda birds, humans, dragons and celestial artistes. 
[Kammadhiaraya] 

(3) pavarasura’ suragarudamanujabhujagagandhabbanarh-of the 
noble gods, demons, garuda birds, humans, dragons and celestial artistes. 
makutani-crowns. 

* pavarasura’ suragarudamanujabhujagagandhabbamakutani- 
the crowns of the noble gods, demons, garuda birds, humans, dragons and 
celestial artistes. [Chatthi Tappurisa] 

(4) pavarasura'suragarudamanujabhujagagandhabbamakutanam- 
of the crowns of noble gods, demons, garuda birds, humans, dragons and 
celestial artistes. kütanl-the tips. 
*pavarasurasuragarudamanujabhujagagandhabbamakuta- 
kütani- the tip of crowns of noble gods, demons, garuda birds, humans, 
dragons and celestial artistes. [Chatthi Tappurisa] 

(5) pavarasura'suragarudamanujabhujagagandhabbamakutaküte- 
Su-on the tip of crowns of noble gods, demons, garuda birds, humans, 
dragons and celestial artistes. cumbita-studded. 

* pavarasura’ suragarudamanujabhujagagandhabbamakutakita 
cumbita-studded on the tip of crowns of noble gods, demons, garuda 
birds, humans, dragons and celestial artistes. [Sattami Tappurisa] 

(6) pavarasura’ suragarudamanujabhujagagandhabbamakutakita- 
cumbita ca- studded on the tip of crowns of noble gods, demons, garuda 
birds, humans, dragons and celestial artistes. te-those (studded). sela ca- 
(are the precious) stones. CA’ ti [catiti] iti-therefore. 
pavarasura’ suragarudamanujabhujagagandhabbamakuta- 
kütacumbitasela-are so called. 

* pavarasura’ suragarudamanujabhujagagandhabbamakuta- 
kütacumbitasela-The precious stones studded on tip of the crowns of 
noble gods, demons, garuda birds, humans, dragons and celestial artistes. 
[Kammadharaya] 

(7) pavarasurasuragarudamanujabhujagagandhabbamaku- 
takutacumbitaselehi-by the precious stones studded on tip of the 


472 


Samasa Kappa 


crowns of noble gods, demons, garuda birds, humans, dragons and celes- 
tial artistes. sanghattita-(are) touched. 

* pavarasura’ suragarudamanujabhujagagandhabbamakuta- 
kütacumbitaselasanghattita-touched by precious stones studded on 


tip of the crowns of noble gods, demons, garuda birds, humans, dragons 
and celestial artistes. [Tatiya Tappurisa] 


(B) 
pavarasura’ suragarudamanujabhujagagandhabbamakutakita- 
cumbitaselasanghattita-touched by precious stones studded on tip of 
the crowns of noble gods, demons, garuda birds, humans, dragons and ce- 
lestial artistes. carana-a pair of feet. yassa tathagatassa-of which 
Buddha. so’ yarh-that Buddha. pavarasurasuragarudamanujabhujaga- 
gandhabbamakutakütacumbitaselasanghattitacarano-is so called. 


e pavarasura’ suragarudamanujabhujagagandhabbamakutakt- 
tacumbitaselasanghattitacarano-The Buddha whose pair of feet are 
touched by precious stones studded on tip of the crowns of noble gods, 
demons, garuda birds, humans, dragons and celestial artistes. [aññapadat- 


tha] tathagato-the Buddha is to be taken as the final meaning of this Ba- 
hubbthi. 


ayam pana dvanda,kammadharaya,tappurisa-gabbho 

tulya’dhikaranabahubbihi. 

This Bahubbthi is a tulyadhikaranabahubbthi with dvanda, kammadha- 

raya, tappurisa compounds concealed inside. 

atha và- 

(1) sanghattita-touched. carana-feet. sahghattitacarana-touched feet. 
[Kammadhiaraya] 

sa’ pekkhatte sati’pi gamakatta samaso. 

Pavarasurasura garudamanujabhujagagandhabbamakutaküta- 

cumbitaselehi- by precious stones studded on the tip of the crowns of no- 

ble gods, demons, garuda birds, humans, dragons and celestial artistes. 

sanghattitacarana-touched feet. yassa tathagatassa so’ yam. 

* pavarasurasuragarudamanujabhujagagandhabbamakutaküta- 

cumbitaselasanghattitacarano-Buddha who has the feet touched with 

precious stones studded on the tip of crowns of noble gods, demons, garuda 


birds, humans, dragons and celestial artistes (whenever they paid respects to 
the Buddha). 


473 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


ayam pana bhinna'dhikaranabahubbihi. 
This Bahubbthi is a bhinna’dhikaranabahubbthi. 


Catu’ddiso 

[catu-four. disa-directions] 
Catu'ddiso' ti-Now, it will be explained this Bahubbthi which contain the 
words “catu’ddiso”: 
catasso-(are unobstructed) four. disa-directions. yassa-whose. so’ yarh- 
that Buddha. catu' ddiso-is called “catu’ddiso”. 
* catuddiso-the Lord Buddha for whom all the four directions are unobstr- 
ucted (as he has the all-penetrating, all-knowing omniscient knowledge). 
[afifiapadattha] bhagava-Buddha is to be taken as the meaning of this 
Bahubbthi compound noun. 


Paficacakkhu 
[pafica-five. cakkhu-eyes] 
Paficacakkhü' ti-Now, it will be explained this Bahubbthi which contain 
the words “pafica cakkhu”: 
pafica-(have) the five. cakkhüni-eyes. yassa-of which, whose. tathaga- 
tassa-Lord Buddha. so'yam-that Buddha. paficacakkhu-is called 
*paficacakkhu", 
e paficacakkhu-the Buddha who has five kinds of eyes. [afifiapadattha] 
tathagato-Buddha is to be taken as the sense of this Bahubbihi compound 
noun. 
Dasabalo 

[dasa-ten. bala-powers of super-knowledge] 
Dasabalo'ti-Now, it will be explained this Bahubbihi which contain the 
words “dasabalo”: 
dasa-(have) the ten. balani-powers. yassa so' yam dasabalo-is so- 
called. * dasabalo-the Buddha who has ten kinds of powers. 
[afifiapadattha] bhagava-Buddha is to be taken as the implied meaning of 
this Bahubbthi compound noun. 


474 


Samasa Kappa 


Ana ntafiano 
[ana’nta-unlimited, infinite. fiana-knowledge.] 
Ana'ntaíiano'ti-Now, it will be explained this Bahubbthi which contain 
the words *anantafiano": 
(1) na'ssa [natassa]. na-(There is) no, aSsa-for that knowledge (of Bud- 
dha). anto-the end, the limit. iti-therefore. anantam-is called “ananta”. 
* anantam-the knowledge which has no limit. 
[ana’nta=na-no+anta-limit] 
(2) anantarh-(is) limitless. iànam-knowledge. yassa tathagatassa-of 
Buddha. so’ yarh-that Buddha. anantafiano-is called “anantafiano”, 
e anantanano-Buddha who has limitless (infinite) knowledge. 
[afifiapadattha] tathagato-Buddha is to be taken as the sense of this Ba- 
hubbthi compound noun. 
Note: This compound is a unique noun since both of its combinations are not 
other compounds, but Bahubbthi only. 


Amita ghana sariro 
[amita-immeasurable. ghana-solid. sarira-body] 
[amita=na-not+mita-measured. i.e. immeasurable] 

Amitaghanasariro' ti-Now, it will be explained this Bahubbthi which 

contain the words “Amitaghanasariro”: 

(1) na-not. mitam-measured. * amitam-unmeasured. [Ubhe Tappurisa] 

(2) ghanam eva-the solid only. sarirarh-body. ° ghanasariram-the 
solid body. [avadharana-Kammadharaya] 

(B) amitam-(is) not measurable. ghanasartram-the strong, solid body. 
yassa tathagatassa-of Buddha. so’ yam-that Buddha. amitaghana- 
sariro-is so called. ० amitaghanasariro-Lord Buddha who has im- 
measurable solid body. (immeasurable means in terms of strength, and 
proportionate body-mass) [afifiapadattha] tathagato-Buddha is to be tak- 
en as the meaning of this Bahubbthi compound noun. 


Amita bala parakkama patto 
[amita-immeasurable. bala-power. parakkama-effort. patta-achieved] 
Amitabalaparakkamapatto ti—Now, it will be explained this Ba- 
hubbthi which contain the words *Amitabala parakkamapatto”: 
(1) na-not. mità-measured. * amità-un-measured. [Ubhe Tappurisa] 
(2) balafi’ca [balarh+ca] balarh ca-power also. parakkamo ca-effort 
also. ० balaparakkam4-power and effort, [Dvanda] 


475 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


(3) amità eva-immeasurable only. balaparakkama-power and efforts. 
* amitabalaparakkama-immeasurable power and effort, 
[avadharana-Kammadharaya] 

(B) amitabalaparakkama-(to) immeasurable power and efforts. patta- 
had achieved or attained. yena-by whom (i.e. Lord Buddha). so” yam 
amitabalaparakkamapatto-is so-called. ° amitabalaparakkama- 
patto-The Lord Buddha who had attained the immeasurable power and 
effort. [afifiapadattha] bhagava-Buddha is the referred meaning of this 
compound. 


ayam pana kammadharaya,dvandagabbho 
tulya’dhikaranabahubbthi. 

This Bahubbthi is a tulya’dhikaranabahubbihi with kammadharaya, 
dvanda concealed inside. 


Matta bhamara gana cumbita vikasitapuppha vallinaga- 
rukkho’pasobhita kandaro 

[matta-inebriated. bhamara-bee. gana-group. cumbita-kissed. vikasita- 

blooming. puppha-flower. valli-vines. nagarukkha-mesua ferrea=iron wood 

tree, upasobhita-adorned. kandaro-valley] 

Matta bhamara gana cumbita vikasitapupphavallinaga- 

rukkho'pasobhitakandaro ti—Now, it will be explained this Ba- 

hubbthi which contain the words *Matta...etc.": 

(1) matta eva-inebriated. bhamara-bees. * mattabhamara-the inebriat- 
ed bees. [avadharana-Kammadharaya] 

(2) mattabhamaranarh-of the inebriated bees. gana-groups. ° mat- 
tabhamaragana-the groups of inebriated bees. [Chatthr Tappurisa] 

(3) mattabhamaraganehi-by groups of inebriated bees. cumbitàni- 
(are) kissed (i.e. touched). ° mattabhamaranacumbitani-kissed by the 
groups of inebriated bees. [Tatiya Tappurisa] 

(4) vikasitani eva-the blooming only. pupphani-flowers. * vikasita- 
pupphani-the blooming flowers. [avadharana-Kammadharaya] 

(5-B) mattabhamaraganacumbitani-(are) kissed by groups of inebriat- 
ed bees. vikasitapupphani-the blooming flowers. yesarh-of which 
(vines, trees etc.) te’ti [te+iti] te-those (vines and mesua ferrea trees) iti- 
therefore. mattabhamaraganacumbitavikasitapuppha-are so 


476 


Samasa Kappa 


called. « mattabhamaraganacumbitavikasitapuppha-the trees 
whose blooming flowers are kissed by the groups of inebriated bees. 
[Bahubbihi] 

(6) valli ca-vine also. nagarukkho ca-mesua ferrea tree also. 
० vallinagarukkha-vine and mesua ferrea trees. [Dvanda] 

(7) mattabhamaraganacumbitavikasitapuppha ca-the plants whose 
blooming flowers are kissed by groups of inebriated bees. te-those plants. 
vallinagarukkha ce’ti [ca*iti] vallinagarukkha ca-vine and mesua 
ferrea trees also. iti-therefore. mattabhamaraganacumbitavikasita- 
pupphavallinagarukkha-are so-called. * mattabhamaraganacum- 
bitavikasitapupphavallinagarukkha-vine and mesua ferrea trees 


whose blooming flowers are kissed by groups of inebriated bees. 
[Kammadhiaraya] 


(8) mattabhamaraganacumbitavikasitapupphavallinagarukkhehi- 
by vine and mesua ferrea trees whose blooming flowers are kissed by 
groups of inebriated bees. upasobhitani-(are) adorned. 

* mattabhamaraganacumbitavikasitapupphavallinagarukkho’ 
pasobhitani-adorned by vine, and mesua ferrea trees whose blooming 
flowers are kissed by groups of inebriated bees. [Tatiya Tappurisa] 

(B) mattabhamaraganacumbitavikasitapupphavallinagarukkho’ 
pasobhitani-(are) adorned by vine and mesua ferrea trees whose bloom- 
ing flowers are kissed by groups of inebriated bees. kandarani-valleys. 
yassa pabbatarajassa-of which great mountain. so’ yam-that moun- 
tain. mattabhamaraganacumbitavikasitapupphavallinaga- 
rukkho’ pasobhitakandaro-is so called. 

* mattabhamaraganacumbitavikasitapupphavallinagarukkho’ 
pasobhitakandaro-the mountain whose valleys are adorned with vines, 


mesua ferrea trees, the blooming flowers, which are kissed by groups of 
inebriated bees. 


[afifiapadattha] pabbataraja-the mountain (with such beautiful valleys) 
is to be taken as the final sense of this compound noun. 


477 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


ayam pana dvanda,kammadharaya,tappurisagabbho 

tulya'dhikaranabahubbihi. 

This Bahubbthi is a tulya’dhikaranabahubbihi with dvanda, 

kammadharaya, tappurisa compounds concealed inside. 

atha va—Here is another method of compounding: 

(1) upasobhitani-beautiful. kandarani-valleys. upasobhitakandarani- 
beautiful valleys. [Kammadharaya] 

sa'pekkhatte sati’pi gamakatta samaso. 

Mattabhamaraganacumbitavikasitapupphavallinagarukkhehi- 


by vine and mesua ferrea trees whose blooming flowers are kissed by groups 
of inebriated bees. 


upasobhitakandarani-(have) beautiful valleys. 

yassa pabbatarajassa-of which mountain. so’ yam. mattabhamara- 
ganacumbitavikasitapupphavallinagarukkho’ pasobhitakandaro-is 
so-called. 
*mattabhamaraganacumbitavikasitapupphavallinagarukkho’ paso 
bhitakandaro-the mountain which have beautiful valleys with vines and 
mesua ferrea trees, the blooming flowers of which are kissed by inebriated 
bees. 

[afifiapadattha] pabbataraja- the mountain (with such beautiful valleys) is 
the final sense of this compound. 

ayam pana bhinna'dhikaranabahubbihi. 

This Bahubbthi is a bhinna’dhikaranabahubbthi. 


Nana rukkha tina patita puppho’pasobhita kandaro 
[nana-various. rukkha-tree. tina-grass. patita-fallen. puppha-flower. 
upasobhita-adorned. kandaro-valley] 
Nanarukkhatinapatitapuppho’ pasobhita kandaro’ti— Now, it 
will be explained this Bahubbthi which contain the words “Nana...ete.”: 
(1) rukkho ca-the tree also. tinafi'ca [tinam-ca] tinam ca-the grass al- 

so. * rukkhatinani-the tree and grass. [Dvanda] 
(2) nanà pakarani eva-various only. rukkhatinani-tree and grass. 
* nanarukkhatinani-various tree and grass. [Kammadharaya] 
(3) nanarukkhatinehi-from various tree and grass. patitani-fallen. 
० nanarukkhatinapatitani-fallen from various tree and grass. 
[Paficami Tappurisa] 


478 


Samasa Kappa 


(4) nanarukkhatinapatitani ca-fallen from various tree and grass. tani- 
those that fall. pupphani ca-(are) the flowers too. ce’ti [catiti] iti- 
therefore. nanarukkhatinapatitapupphani-are so called, 

* nanarukkhatinapatitapupphani-the flowers fallen from various tree 
and grass. [Kammadharaya] 

(5) nanarukkhatinapatitapupphehi-with the flowers fallen from various 
tree and grass. upasobhitani-are adorned. ° nanarukkhatinapatita- 
puppho’ pasobhitani-adorned with the flowers fallen from various 
trees and grass. [Tatiya Tappurisa] 

(B) nanarukkhatinapatitapuppho’ pasobhitani- adorned with the 
flowers fallen from various trees and grass. kandarani-valleys. yassa 
pabbatarajassa-of which mountain. so’ yam-that mountain. 
nanarukkhatinapatitapuppho’ pasobhitakandaro-is so called. 


* nanarukkhatinapatitapuppho’ pasobhitakandaro-the mountain 
which has valleys adorned with the flowers fallen from various trees and 
grass. [afifiapadattha] pabbataraja. 


ayam pana dvanda,kammadharaya,tappurisagabbho 

tulyadhikaranabahubbihi. 

This Bahubbthi is a tulyadhikaranabahubbihi with dvanda, 

kammadharaya, tappurisa concealed inside. 

atha va-upasobhitàni eva-adorned only. kandarani-valleys. 

upasobhitakandarani-adorned valleys. [Kammadharaya] 

sa’ pekkhatte sati’pi gamakatta samaso. 

(B) nanarukkhatinapatitapupphehi-by flowers fallen from various trees 
and grass. upasobhitakandarani-(are) adorned valleys. yassa pab- 
batarajassa-of which mountain. so'yam-that mountain. 
nanarukkhatinapatitapupphopasobhitakandaro-is so called. 


* nanarukkhatinapatitapupphopasobhitakandaro-the mountain 
whose valleys are adorned with flowers fallen from various trees and 
grass. [afifiapadattha] pabbataraja. 


ayam pana bhinna'dhikaranabahubbihi. 
This Bahubbthi is a bhinna’dhikaranabahubbthi. 


479 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


Nana musala phala pabbata taru kalingara sara dhanu- 

gada'si tomara hattha. 

[nana-various. musala-pestle. phala-ploughshare. pabbata-mount. taru- 

tree. kalingara-pieces of wood such as twigs and branches. sara-arrow. 

dhanu-bow. gada-javelin. asi-sword. tomara-lance. hattha-hands] 

Nanamusala phala pabbata taru kalingara sara dhan gada’si 

tomara hattha' ti-Now, it will be explained this Bahubbihi which contain 

the words “Nana...etc.”: 

(1) musalo ca-pestle also. phalo ca-ploughshare also. pabbato ca- 
mount also. taru ca-tree also. kalingaro ca-piece of wood also. saro 
Ca-arrow also. dhanu ca-bow also. gadā ca-javelin also. asi ca-sword 
also. tomaro ca-lance also. 

* musalaphalapabbatatarukalingarasaradhanugadasitomara- 
pestle, ploughshare, mount, tree, piece of wood, arrow, bow, javelin, 
sword and lance. [Dvanda compound] 

(2) nana pakara eva-various only. 
musalaphalapabbata tarukalingarasaradhanugadasitomara- 


pestle, ploughshare, mount, tree, piece of wood, arrow, bow, javelin, 
sword, and lance. 


* nanamusalaphalapabbatatarukalingarasaradhanugadasi 
tomara-various pestle, ploughshare, mount, tree, piece of wood, arrow, 
bow, javelin, sword and lance. [avadharana-Kammadharaya] 

(B) nanamusalaphalapabbatatarukalingarasaradhanugadasi 
tomara-(are) various pestle, ploughshare, mount, tree, piece of wood, 
arrow, bow, javelin, sword, and lances. hatthesu-(held) in the hands. 
yesam-of whose (the companions of Mara, the evil one). te-those com- 
panions. nanamusalaphalapabbatatarukalingarasaradhanu- 
gadasitomarahattha-are so called. ° nanamusalaphalapabbata- 
tarukalingarasaradhanugadasitomara hattha-the companions of 
Mara, the evil one, in whose hands are various pestle, ploughshare, 
mount, tree, piece of wood, arrow, bow, javelin, sword and lances (pre- 


paring to launch an assault on Buddha so as to disrupt his efforts to attain 
enlightenment under the Bodhi tree). 


480 


Samasa Kappa 


ayam pana dvanda,kammadharayagabbho 


bhinna’dhikaranabahubbihi. 
This Bahubbthi is a bhinna’dhikaranabahubbihi with dvanda, kamma 
dharaya compounds concealed inside. 


Note: This Bahubbihi is called a bhinna’dhikaranabahubbthi because 

(1) the word *nanamusalaphalapabbatatarukalingarasaradhanu- 
gada'sitomara" is in nominative plural while its correlative word “hattha” 
ends in the locative plural as *hatthesu". So, they are not tulya’dhikarana 
as both component words are in different case-endings. 


Bahubbihi-icca'nena kvattho? Bahubbihimhi ca. 

What benefit is there by terming “Bahubbthi’’? 

It has the benefit of making easy reference in such Suttas as 
“Bahubbthimhi ca” etc. 


३२९, ३५७. नामानं समुच्चयो sal 
329, 357. Namànam samuccayo dvando. 
[Namanam-samuccayo-dvando. 3 words] 
[V] Namanam ekavibhattikanam yo samuccayo, 
so dvandasaífio hoti. 


When multiple nouns of different meanings but with the 

same vibhattis are joined together, it is called *dvanda- 

copulative compound". 

Summary: This Sutta defines a dvanda Samasa. The two 

chief distinctive marks of a dvanda are: 

(1) having a nipata “ca” after every component word, 

(2) all the component words including nipata particle “ca” 
end in the nominative-case in the ED. [See the EDs and ex- 
amples to validate this]. 


(1) candimà ca-moon also, süriyo ca-sun also, 
e candimastiriya-moon and suns. 

(2) samano ca-monk also, brahmano ca-the Brahmin also, 
* samanabrahmana-the monk and Brahmins. 

(3) sariputto ca-Venerable Sariputta also, moggalano ca- 


Venerable Moggalana also, * sariputtamoggalana- 
Venerable Sariputta and Venerable Moggalanas. 


481 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


(4) brahmano ca-the Brahmin also, gahapatiko ca-householder 
also, * brahmanagahapatika- the Brahmin and householders. 
(5) yamo ca-yama also, varuno ca-varuna also, 
* yamavaruna-(two deities named) Yama and Varunas. 
(6) kuvero ca-kuvera also, Vàsavo Ca-vasava also, 
० kuveravasava- Kuvera and Vasavas. (two guardian deities 
so-named) 
Dvanda-icca'nena kvattho? Dvandattha va. 
What benefit is there by terming “dvanda’’? 
It has the benefit of making easy reference in such Suttas 
as *Dvandattha va" etc. 


३३०, ३४०. महतं महा तुल्याधिकरणे पदे 
330, 340. Mahatam maha tulya’dhikarane pade. 
[Mahatarh+maha+tulyadhikarane+pade. 4 words] 
[V] Tesam mahantasaddanam maha-adeso hoti tulyadhikarane 
pade. 


The word “mahanta” in a Kammadharaya compound, 

changes to “maha”. 

Note: The front word always has to follow the gender of next word. 

(1) mahanto ca-great also. SO-that great. puriso ca-is man also. 
ca’ti [catiti] iti-therefore. mahapuriso-is called “mahapuriso”, 
e mahàpuriso-the great man. 

(2) mahanti ca-great. sa-that woman. devi-is queen. ca’ ti 
* mahadevi-the great queen. 

(3) mahantafi'ca [mahantarh+ca] mahantam ca-great. tam-that 
great. balafica’ti [balarn+catiti] balam ca-is power. iti. 
° mahabalam-the great power. 

(4) mahanto ca so nàgo ca-dragon. ca’ti e mahanago-the great 
dragon, the great elephant or great saint (three possible meanings). 

(5) mahanto ca so yaso ca-fame or retinue. ca'ti ० mahayaso-the 
great fame or retinue (two possible meanings). 

(6) mahantafi'ca tam padumavanafi’ca’ti [padumavanarn+ca+iti] 
padumavanam ca-red lotus grove. [paduma-lotus*-vanarn- 


482 


Samasa Kappa 


grove] 
* mahapadumavanarh-the great red lotus-grove. 
(7) mahanti ca sa nadi-river. ca’ti ° mahanadi-the great river. 
(8) mahanto ca so mani-ruby. ca'ti e mahamani-the great ruby. 
(9) mahanto ca so gahapatiko-householder or the wealthy man. 
ca’ti e mahagahapatiko-the great house-holder or the great 
wealthy man. 
(10) mahantafi’ca tam dhanafi'ca'ti [dhanarh+ca+iti] dhanam- 
wealth. * mahadhanath-the great wealth. 
(11) mahanto ca so pufifio ca-virtuous. ca’ ti 
e mahapufifio-the great virtuous. 


Bahuvacanaggahanena kvaci mahantasaddassa maha- 
deso hoti. 


By means of bahuvacana (plural number indicated by the word 
“mahatarh” in Sutta), changing of “mahanta” into “maha” can 
occur in some Kammadharaya compound nouns. [Please note 
that it is with a short vowel “maha”. See the examples. Augmentation 
with either a similar or dissimilar consonant is also occurred in each ex- 
ample which is shown in bold] 
(1) mahantafi'ca [mahantarh+ca] mahantam ca tam 
phalaf’ca’ti [phalarh+catiti] phalam ca-fruit or result. 
e maha’ pphalarh-the great fruit or the great result. 
(2) ° maha’ bbalarh-the great power. [No ED in these examples, just only 
examples] €vaM-similarly in this way. 
(3) * maha’ ddhanarh-the great wealth. 
(4) ° maha’ bbhayath-the great danger or the great fear. 


३३१, ३५३. इत्थियं भासितपुमित्थी पुमाव चे 
331, 353. Itthiyam bhasitapumi'tthi puma’va ce. 
[Itthtyarn+bhasitapuma+itthi+puma+ivatce.6] 
[V] Itthiyam tulya'dhikarane pade ce bhasitapumi'tthr puma’va 
datthabba. 


In a Bahubbthi compound, the last component word which 
once used to belong to feminine gender, has to be assumed 





483 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


as that of a masculine gender of the completed compound 
(when it becomes a complete word). 


(1) digha-long. jahgha-legs. yassa-of whose. so'yam 
* dighajangho-the one who has long legs. 
(2) * kalyanabhariyo-the one who has good wife. 
(3) * pahiitapafifio-the one who has much wisdom. 
[All three are Bahubbthi]. 


Explanation 
In these three examples, the last component words “jangha-calf or leg, 
bhariya-wife, pafitia-wisdom" are permanent feminine gender nouns. 
So, they can still assume feminine gender in the compounding process 
of ED. But, when the word becomes a complete word, they have be- 
come of masculine gender as the meaning of completed compound 
noun refers to only the man who has long leg, good wife and much wis- 
dom. 
Bhasitapume’ti kimattham"? 
What is the word “bhasitapume” for? 
To show that the last component word “bhariya-(wife)” in 
the example below is not a *bhasitapuma-word". It is al- 
ways a feminine gender. Hence, it does not need to be 
assumed as a masculine noun. 
brahmanabandhu ca-of the Brahmin caste also. sà-that woman. 
bhariya ca-(is) wife also. cati * brahmanabandhubhariya-the 
Brahmin-caste wife. [Kammadharaya] 


३३२, ३४३. कम्मधारयसञ्ञे च 
332, 343. kammadharayasaniie ca. 
[Kammadharayasafifie+ca. 2 words] 
[V] Kammadharayasafifie ca samase itthiyarh tulya’ dhikarane 
pade pubbe bhasitapumi'tthi ce, puma’va datthabba. 


In a Kammadharaya compound, the first component word, 
which is currently a modifier adjective to the latter in femi- 
nine gender, has to be assumed as that of a masculine gen- 


der when the compound becomes a completed word. 
(It means that the first word serving as a modifier adjective to the latter 


484 


Samasa Kappa 


of feminine gender has to be in the same feminine gender as per the 
grammatical rule in the pending etymological process of compound. It 
is the rule of syntax that the qualifier and the qualified has to be in the 
same gender and of same vibhatti. But, when completed, the preceding 
word must re-assume its masculine gender, no longer of feminine gen- 
der which it has once been conformed to during the compounding pro- 
cess of ED.) 


(1) ° brahmanadarika-the Brahmin girl, 


(2) * khattiyakafifia-the Khattiya girl, 
(3) * khattiyakumarika-the Khattiya little girl. 


Explanation 

In these three examples, the first component words “brahmana-Brahmin, 
khattiya-warrior" are usually of masculine genders. So, they can still assume 
feminine gender in the compounding process of ED by being “Brahmani, 
Khattiya" as per the grammatical rule. See the possible ED of the example 
words shown below. 
(1) brahmant ca sa darika ca'ti ° brahmanadarika [This is ED] 

Here is the Meaning of ED: 

brahmant ca-(is) the Brahmin caste also. Sa-that woman. darika ca-is 


also the girl. iti-therefore ® brahmanadarika-the Brahmin caste girl. 

[The EDs are not shown in the original grammatical text. This is a sample 
of possible ED shown as correctly as possible. In the ED, see the word 
"brahmanr" which ends in an “1-affix” indicating the feminine gender. This 
first word has to follow the feminine gender of the last word *darika" as it is 
of feminine gender]. 

In the meaning of completed word, the first component words re-assume their 
masculine gender as the meaning of completed compound noun refers to only 
the one whose caste or family back-ground is that of a Brahmin or Khattiya 
caste system. 


Bhasitapume’ti kimattham? 

What is the word “bhasitapume” for? 

To show that the last component word “darika-the young girl" in 
the example shown below is not a *bhasitapuma-word". It is al- 
ways of a feminine gender. Hence, it does not need to be as- 
sumed as a masculine noun. 


[bhasita-said before, i.e. being indicative of. puma-literally means male, i.e. 
masculine gender]. 


(1) * khattiyabandhudarika-the young girl of Khattiya caste. 


485 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


(2) * brahmanabandhudarika-the young girl of Brahmin caste. 
[All examples are Kammadharaya compounds]. 


333, ३४४. अत्तं नस्स quid 
333, 344. Attam nassa tappurise. 
[Attarn+nassa+tappurise. 3 words] 
[V] Nassa padassa tappurise uttarapade attam hoti. 
The word “na (meaning not)" which is the first component 


6699 


part in a tappurisa compound, changes into an “a”. 


(1) na brahmano [ED] * abrahmano. [Complete word] 

(2) * avasalo. (3) * abhikkhu. 

(4) ° apaficavassam. (5) * apaficagavam. (Refer to Sutta 326) 
[All examples are Ubhe-tappurisa compounds]. 


३३४, ३४५. सरे अन्‌ 
334, 345. Sare an. [Saretan. 2 words] 
[V] Nassa padassa tappurise an-adeso hoti sare pare. 


In an Ubhe-tappurisa compound when the “na” is followed 
by a vowel of the vowel-initial-component word, it changes 
into an “an”. 

Note: The function of previous Sutta is applicable for the consonant- 
initial Ubhe-tappurisa compounds. The function of this Sutta 1s applica- 
ble for the vowel-initial Ubhe tappurisa compounds such as “asso, is- 
saro, ariyo” and so forth. See the examples carefully to clarify this. 


(1) na-not. asso-horse. * anasso-non-horse. 
(2) * anissaro-not Lord, uncontrolled, undominated. 
(3) * anariyo-not noble. [All are Ube-tappurisa compounds] 


३३५, ३४६. कदू कुस्स 


335, 346. Kad kussa. [Kad+kussa. 2 words] 
[V] Ku-icce'tassa kad hoti sare pare. 


486 


Samasa Kappa 


In a Kammadharaya compound where the “ku (means bad or 
disgusting)" 1s the first component part of the compound, it is 
then to be changed into “kad”. [“ku” is substituted with *kad"] 


(1) kucchitam-disgusting, or of poor taste. annam-rice. [ED] 
* kadannath-the disgusting or poorly-cooked rice. 
[The complete word] 

(2) kucchitam-bad. asanam-food. 
e kadasanarh-bad food (without taste.) 


Sare'ti kimattham? 

What is the word "sare" for? 

To show that examples shown below are inapplicable as 

they do not have sara (vowels) in the initial of them. 

(See the last component words: dara-wife, jana-people, putta-son, 

geha-home, vattha-cloth, dasa-servant. The initial letter in them is not 

a vowel, but consonants “d, j, p, g, v and d". Hence, are inapplicable.) 

(1) kucchita-disgusting. dara-wife. yesarh-of whose. 
(apufifiakaranam-those who have done unwholesome deeds). 
te-those. honti’ ti [honti+iti] honti-are. iti-therefore. 
i.e. those who had done unwholesome deeds in the past have bad 
wife. They are called **kudara". * kudara-those who have bad 
wife. 

(2) * kujanà-those who have bad people (friends). 

Evam- 

(1) * kuputta-those who have bad son. 

(2) * kugeha-those who have bad home. 

(3) * kuvattha-those who have bad (poor-quality) cloth. 

(4) * kudasa-those who have bad servant [All Bahubbihi compounds] 


३३६, ३४७. काप्पत्थेसु च 
336, 347. Ka'ppa'tthesu Ca. [Kat+appa-atthesu+ca. 3 words] 
[V] Ku-icce'tassa kà hoti appa'tthesu ca. 


In a Kammadharaya compound where “ku (here it means little 
amount, small in size)" is the first component part of the com- 
pound, it changes into “kā”. [“ku” is substituted with “ka” 


487 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


* kalavanam-little salt. [ka-little+lavana-salt] 
e kapuppharh-small flower. [ka-small+puppha-flower] 


Bahuvacanaggahanam kimattham"? 
What is the use of Bahuvacana (refer to the word *Ka'ppa'tthe 
su" in Sutta which is in locative, plural number *su") for? 


Ku-icce'tassa ana'ppatatthesu'pi kvaci ka hoti. 


2235 


To show that changing “ku” into “ka” can also happen in 
some words with other meaning (such as being bad or evil etc). 
० kapurisa-bad men. [ka-bad+purisa-man] [Kammadharaya com- 
pound] 
Note: (a) The function of previous Sutta 335 1s applicable for com- 
pounds which begins with a vowel. 
(b) The function of this Sutta is applicable for compounds which 
begins with consonants such as *lavanam", *puppham" and 
so on. See the examples carefully to clarify this difference. 


330, 340. क्वचि समासन्तगतान मकारन्तो 


337, 350. Kvaci samasa’ntagatana’makara’nto. 
[Kvaci*samasa-antagatanam-akaro-anto. 4 words] 
[V] Samasa'ntagatanam namana'manto saro kvaci akaro hoti. 


The last component vowel at the end of a compound, 

changes into an “a”. 

[This Sutta changes the end-vowel of the last word of some compound 

nouns into an “a”. For example, the end vowels "a" of raja-king etc. 

will remain in "a" while "i" of akkhi-eye etc. will change into "a". See 

the examples 1 and 8 to clarify this function] 

(1) devanam-of deities. raja-king. ° devarajo, * devaraja-the 
king of deities. [Chatthi-tappurisa] 

(2) devanam sakha-friend. ° devasakho, ® devasakha-the friend 
of deities. [Chatthi-tappurisa] 

(3) pafica-five. ahani-days. * pafica’harh-five days. [paficataharh, 
Digu] 

(4) ° satta' ham-seven days. [sattataharh, Digu] 

(5) ° paficagavam-five cows. [Digu] 

(6) * chattu’ pahanarh-umbrella and slipper. [Dvanda] 


488 


Samasa Kappa 


(7) * upasaradam-the talk regarding autumn. [Abyayibhava] 
(8) * visalakkho-the wide-eyed person. [Bahubbihi] 
(9) ° vimukho-the person who has unsightly face. [Bahubbihi] 


Karaggahanarh kimattharn? Akaranta ikaranta ca honti. 
What is the word “kara” for? 

[Refer to the word “Kara” in *makaranto" in Sutta] 

It is to show that by the word “kara” in Sutta, the last com- 
ponent vowel of some compound nouns can also be 
changed into “ā or i”. 


The example of “4-function”. (“7 shown underlined in the example) 
(1) paccakkha-attained, known. dhamma-the dhamma. yassa 
so'yan'ti [ED] * paccakkhadhamma-the who has attained 
Dhamma. [complete word, Bahubbthi compound] 


66599 
1 


The example of “i-function” (“i shown underlined). 

(1) surabhino-of pleasant flower. gandho-odor. 
* surabhigandhi-the odor of pleasant flower.[Chatthi-tappurisa] 

(2) sundaro-good. gandho-smell. ° sugandhi-the good 
smell. [Kammadharaya] 

(3) pütino-foul. gandho-smell. * pütigandhi-the foul smell. 
[Kammadharaya] 

(4) kucchito-disgusting. gandho * kugandhi-disgusting smell. 
[Kammadharaya] 

(5) dutthu-bad. gandho-smell. yassa so'yan'ti [so*ayam-iti] 
* dugandhi-something which has a bad smell. [Bahubbihi] 

(6) pūti eva-foul only. gandho-smell. « pütigandhi-the foul smell. 
[Kammadharaya] 


Nadi-antà ca kattu-anta ca kapaccayo hoti samasa’nte. 


The “ka” affix can be applied at the end of *nad1" and 
“kattu-doer” in the bahubbihi compound nouns. 
(1) bahü-(are) plenty. nadiyo-rivers. yasmirh-in which (district). 
so'yam-that district. bahunadiko-is so called. 
* bahunadiko-the district where there are a lot of rivers. 
[Bahubbthi] 
[afifiapadattha] janapado-the district is to be regarded as the final 
sense of this compound. 


489 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


(2) bahavo-(are) plenty. kattaro-doers, i.e. workers. yassa-whose 
(employer). SO’ yarh-that man (employer). bahukattuko-is so- 
called. ° bahukattuko-the man who has many workers. [Ba- 


hubbthi] puriso-the man (employer) who has many workers, is to be 
taken as the sense of this compound noun. 


३३८, ३५६. नदिम्हा च 
338, 356. Nadimha ca. [Nadimha+ca. 2 words] 
[V] Nadimha ca kapaccayo hoti samasa’nte. 


The affix “ka” has to be added after the last component 
word “nad?” in a Bahubbthi compound. [This function was al- 
ready shown in the preceding Sutta. It is shown here again to show the 
consistency of the function. The applied “ka” is shown underlined] 
(1) bahü nadiyo yasmim so’yan’ti ° bahunadiko. 
(Refer to the preceding Sutta) 
(2) baht kantiyo-pleasures. yassa so'yan'ti ० bahukantiko-the 
man who has a lot of pleasures (amenities). [Bahubbthi] 
(2) * bahunariko-the man who has a lot of women. [Bahubbihi] 


३३९, ३५८. जायाय तु दंजानि पतिम्हि 
339, 358. Jayaya tu dam,jani patimhi. 
[Jayayattu+dam, janit+patimhi. 4 words] 
[V] J&ya-icce’taya tu dam,jani-icce’te adesa honti patimhi 
pare. [The particle “tu” is an expletive without specific meaning] 


The front word “jaya-wife” changes into “dam” and “jāni” 
when the word “pati-husband” follows in a dvanda com- 
pound. (See the function shown underlined.) 

* dampati (दंपति) * janipati-wife and husband. 

[Both examples are of the same meaning. Dvanda compound] 


490 


Samasa Kappa 


3*0, ३५५. धनुम्हा च 
340, 355. Dhanumha ca. [Dhanumha+ca. 2 words] 
[V] Dhanumha ca 4-paccayo hoti samasa’nte. 


An “a” is be added after the word *dhanu (arrow)" in a Ba- 
hubbihi compound. 


gandivo-noded. dhanu-bow. yassa so’yarh gandivadhanva-is 
so-called. ० gandivadhanva-the one who has knotted-bow. [Ba- 
hubbihi]. 

Note: This example word (गण्डवधन्वा) is also found in the Panini, Sutta Num- 


ber 5-4-132. 


३४१, ३३६. अं विभत्तीन मकारन्ता अब्ययीभावा 
341, 336. Am vibhattina’makaranta abyayibhava. 
[Arm+vibhattinamntakaranta+abyayibhava. 4 words] 
[V] Tasma akara’nta abyayibhavasamasa parasam vibhattinam 
kvaci am hoti. 


In a-ending Abyayibhava compounds, the vibhattis applied 
after them sometimes changes into “m”. 
(See the examples carefully to clarify it. “th” is shown underlined) 


* adhicittam-the mind-related thing. 

e yathavuddham-according to seniority. 

e upakumbhath-the talk about pot. 

e yavajivarh-for lifetime. 

* tiropabbatarh-beyond the mountain. 

e tiropakaram-beyond the fence. 

* tirokuttam-beyond the wall. 

e antopasadam-inside the mansion. 

Kvacr'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “kvaci” for? To show that in some exam- 
ples like the ones shown below, the function of Sutta is not 
applied as restricted by the word "kvaci". 

* adhicittassa-the one striving for mental development. bhikkhu- 
no-of the monk. 


491 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


What does the function of *kvaci" mean? 

It means that when such compound nouns are used as an adjective in 

the wider areas of Buddhist texts based on the context, different case- 
endings are applied. Thus, the rule of Sutta is only a statement of the 

general pattern of such nouns. 


Note: Though it is said in Sutta as only a-ending Abyayibhava is appli- 
cable, it should be noted that a-ending abyayibhava compound is also 
applicable by the function of this Sutta after “a” is shortened by the next 
Sutta 342. See a-ending abyayibhava example “upagangath” shown in 


the next Sutta to clarify this fact. 





3*3, ३३७. सरो रस्सो नपुंसके 


342, 337. Saro rasso napumsake. 
[Sarot+rasso+napumsake. 3 words] 
[V] Napumsake vattamanassa abyayibhavasamasassa lingassa 
saro rasso hoti. 


In Abyayibhava compounds of neuter gender, the end digha 
(long vowels) “A, 1, पं”, change into “rassa (short vowels)”. 


(1) kumarisu-in the girls. adhikicca-regarding. pavattati-arises. 
katha-talk. i.e. the talk arises regarding the young the girls. iti- 
therefore. ° adhikumari-the talk regarding young girls. 

[Here, the last vowel ‘T’ of *kumari-young girl” is shortened into *1"] 

(2) * upavadhu-the talk regarding daughter-in-law. [Here, the last 
vowel “ii” of *vadhü-daughter in law" is shortened into *u"] 

(3) * upagangam-the talk regarding the river Ganges. [Here, the last 
vowel “a” of *ganga-the river Ganges” is shortened into an “a’’] 

(4) ° upamanikarh-the talk regarding big-water-pot. [Here, the last 
vowel “a” of *manika-big water pot" is shortened into an *a"] 


492 


Samasa Kappa 


३४३, ३३८. अञ्ञस्मा लोपो च 

343, 338. Afifiasma lopo Ca. [Afifiasma+lopotca. 3 words] 

[V] Afifasma abyayibhavasamasa anakara'nta parasam 
vibhattinam lopo ca hoti. 


Except the vibhatti (case-endings) applied after a-ending 
abyayibhava compounds, the vibhattis which have been ap- 
plied after those 1, ü-ending abyayibhava compounds, are to 
be elided. 


e adhi'tthi-the talk regarding woman. [adhi+itthi] 

e adhikumari. [Adhi-kumari] 

e upavadhu. [Upa+vadhi] (Refer to previous Sutta for the meaning) 
Explanation: The vibhatti applied after a-ending abyayibhava is not 
elided as it undergoes morphological procedure of changing into “am” 
by Sutta 341. Also, in 4-ending abyayibhava compounds, 4 is shortened 
by the preceding Sutta and then undergoes similar procedure by Sutta 
341. In 1, ü-ending abyayibhava compounds, the vibhattis applied after 
them are to be elided as they do not need to undergo any further mor- 
phological function. Compare similar functions enjoined for those 
plain, non-compound nouns ending in *1, ü" by Suttas 118, 220 in the 
nouns chapter. 


Endings of Abyayibhava Compound 
(The Endings of compound is usually to be determined by the gender and 
ending of the last word after the first preceding Upasagga or Nipata word) 
(a) The Abyayibhava compound nouns ending in “a” 
० adhicittam. [adhi+citta] 
e upanagaram. [upatnagara] 
e tiropabbatarh etc. [tiro+pabbata] 
(b) The Abyayibhava compound nouns ending in “a”, 
० upagangam. [upatganga] 
e upamanikam etc. [upatmanika] 
(c) The Abyayibhàva compound nouns ending in "T", 
° adhi tthi. [adhi+itthi] 
e adhikumari etc. [adhi+kumari] 
(d) The Abyayibhava compound nouns ending in *ü", 
e upavadhu etc. [upa*vadhü] 


493 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


Iti namakappe samasakappo sattamo kando. 
Samasa Chapter, the Seventh Section of Noun ends. 


Samasakappo nitthito. 
Samasa Chapter ends. 


494 


Taddhita Kappa 


5. Taddhita Kappa 
Taddhita?* Chapter 
(Nouns in Taddhita Affixes) 
Atthama Kanda 
The Eighth Section of Noun 


Apacca Taddhita 
[Apacca-son, offspring, descendant] 
(Nouns in Patronymic-affixes) 


Note: Suttas 344, 345, 346, 347, 348, 349 apply the affixes 
which are expressive of family lineage or ancestry of a proper 
noun. 


३४४, ३६१. वा णापच्चे 
344, 361. Và na’ pacce. [Va+natapacce. 3 words] 
[V] Napaccayo hoti và "tassa" pacca" micce’tasmim atthe. 


To signify “the son or descendant of someone", an affix 


^pa" is sometimes added after that noun denoting it. 
[The affix “ņa” is invisible in the examples] 


Note: There are three types of endings in each example: 
ending in “o, am, and T’. The “o” and "am", are vibhatti- 
derivative morphemes of masculine and neuter genders re- 
spectively while "T" is an affix for the feminine gender. The 
“o” is morpheme of nominative singular "si" for any nouns 
of masculine gender while *am" is derivative morpheme of 
"si" for nouns of neuter gender. The "1" represents nouns 


belonging to feminine gender which has no morpheme as 


20 Taddhita=ta-of that nounthita-the well-being & meaning enhancer. All the 
affixes such as na etc. are formally called *Taddhita" as they enhance as well 
as complement the meaning of nouns. “h” is substituted with “dh” and aug- 
mented with a “d”. Thus it becomes “Taddhita” in stead of “tahita”. 


495 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


applied “si” is elided. Such type of word-endings will be 
found not only in Taddhita, but also in Samasa, Kita and 
Unadi chapters as those words are also nouns in different 
genders. To highlight this, the word “si” is included in the 
WA of each Taddhita nouns. The word analysis [WA] 15 
shown only where necessary. WA for most examples is 
quite easy to study in Taddhita. In WA, there will be slight 
changes of vowels between the example and word analysis. 
For example, it will be à, e or o though it is shown as a, i, 
or u in the word analysis of example word. This is due to 
the Vuddhi procedure occurred in the example as a result 
of having an n-conjoined affix. [Refer to Sutta 400, 404] 











(1) (a) vasitthassa-of a person named Vasittha. apaccarh-son or 
male descendant. vasittho-Vasittha's son or descendant. 
[Masculine noun] 

[wa] * vasittho=vasitthat+natsi. (a is a lengthened vuddhi 
vowel) 
* vasitthassa apaccam va. 

Note: This is not an example. It is rather an incomplete sentence 

which signifies as being inapplicable. Throughout this grammar 

text, any inapplicability will be sometimes shown by means of such 
incomplete sentences which may also contain a nipdta particle “va”. 


(b) vasitthassa apaccarh-daughter or female descendant. 
* vasitthi-Vasittha’s daughter or female descendant. [Feminine 
Taddhita-noun] [wa] vasitthi=vasitthat+nati+si 
[‘‘si” is elided. “a” of va is a vuddhi vowel] 

(c) vasitthassa apaccam-descendant race as a whole. 

* vasittham- Vasittha's race. [Taddhita-noun, Neuter gender] 
[wa] ° vasittham-vasittha--na-si [“si” becomes *am"] 
Note: As WA of all three examples in three genders are quite easy 

to understand, only the first one's WA will be shown. 
Evam-similarly in this way. 
(2) * bharadvajo-bharadvaja m-descendant. 
[wa] bharadvajo-bharadvaja-*tna-si. 
० bharadvaji-bharadvaja f-descendant. 


496 


Taddhita Kappa 


[wa] bharadvajr-bharadvaja-*na-1-si. 

* bharadvajam-bharadvaja race. 

[wa] bharadvajarh=bharadvajatnatsi. 
Note: In next examples, only WA of one example will be shown as it is 
easy to understand. 
(3) * gotamo-Gotama m-descendant. 

e gotami-Gotama f-descendant. 

* gotamam-Gotama race. 

[wa] gotamo=Gotama+natsi. 
(4) * vasudevo-Vasudeva m-descendant. 

० vasudevi-Vasudeva f-descendant. 

* vasudevam-Vasudeva race. 

[wa] vasudevo=Vasudevatnatsi. 
(5) * baladevo-Baladeva m-descendant. 

e baladevi-Baladeva f- descendant. ० baladevam-Baladeva race. 

[wa] baladevo=Baladevatnatsi. 
(6) ° vesamitto-Vesamitta m-descendant. * vesamittI-Vesamitta 

f- descendant. ० vesamittam-Vesamitta race. 

[wa] vesamitto=Vesamittat+natsi. 
Note: Please note that m-descendant means male-descendant while f- 
descendant means female-descendant. 


३४५, 3&&. णायनणान वच्छादितो 
345, 366. Nayana, nana vaccha'dito. 


[Nayana, nana+vaccha-adito. 2 words] 


[V] Tasma vaccha'dito gottaganato nayana,nanapaccaya honti 


và “tassa’pacca” micce’tasmim atthe. 


To express “the son or descendant of someone", affixes 
“nayana, nana” are added after the race-descriptive noun 


“vaccha (a man so-named) etc". 

Note: “n” of nayana, nana is usually elided. Hence, only *ayana and 
ana" will be left. This pattern 1s clearly shown underlined in the first set 
of examples. Please look carefully to understand it. 


(1) (a) vacchassa-of Vaccha. apaccam * vacchayano, 
vacchano-Vaccha m-descendant. [M-gender] 


497 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


* vacchassa apaccam va. 
[wa] vacchayano=vacchatnayanatsi. 
[wa] vacchano=vaccha+nanat+si. 
(b) vacchassa apaccam ® vacchayani, ® vacchani-Vaccha 
f-descendant. [F-gender] 
[wa] vacchayani=vaccha+nayana+t+si. 
[wa] vacchani=vacchat+nana+1+tsi. 
(c) vacchassa apaccam ® vacchayanam, ® vacchanarh- 
Vaccha race. [N-gender] 
[wa] vacchayanam-vaccha-nayana-si. 
[wa] vacchanam-vaccha-*nana-si. 
(2) sakatassa apaccam * sakatayano, * sakatano-Sakata 
m-descendant. 
* sakatassa apaccam va. 
e sakatayant, ® sakatani-Sakata f-descendant. 
e sakatayanarh, ° sakatanarh-Sakata race. 
[wa] sakatayano=sakatat+nayana+si. 
[wa] sakatano=sakata+nanatsi [‘a” of sakata is a vuddhi 
vowel. Only WA of masculine gender words will be shown] 
Evam--- 
(3) * kanhayano, * kanhano-Kanha m-descendant. 
* kanhassa apaccam va. 
e kanhayani, ° kanhani-Kanha f-descendant. 
e kanhayanam, ° kanhanarh-Kanha race. 
[wa] kanhayano=kanha+nayanatsi. 
[wa] kanhano-kanha-nana-si. 
(4) * aggivessayano, * aggivessano-Aggivessa m-descendant. 
* aggivessayani, * aggivessani-Aggivessa f-descendant. 
e aggivessayanarm, ° aggivessanam-Aggivessa race. 
[wa] aggivessayano-aggivessa-nayana-si. 
[wa] aggivessano-aggivessa-*nana-si. 
(5) ० gacchayano, * gacchano-Gaccha m-descendant. 
e gacchayani, * gacchàni-Gaccha f-descendant. 
e gacchayanam, ० gacchanam-Gaccha race. 
[wa] gacchayano=gacchatnayanatsi. 
[wa] gacchano=gaccha+nanatsi. 


498 


Taddhita Kappa 


(6) * kappayano, * kappano-Kappa m-descendant. 
* kappayant, * kappani-Kappa f-descendant. 
e kappayanam, * kappanarh-Kappa race. 
[wa] kappayano=kappatnayanatsi. 
[wa] kappano-kappa-nana-si. 
(7) * moggallayano, ° moggallano-Moggalla m-descendant. 
e moggallayani, ° moggallani-Moggalla f-descendant. 
e moggallayanam, ° moggallanam-Moggalla race. 
[wa] moggalayano=moggala+nayanatsi. 
[wa] moggalano=moggala+nanatsi. 
(8) * muficayano, * muficano-Mufica m-descendant. 
e muficayani, ° muficani-Mufica f-descendant. 
e muficayanam, ° muficanam-Mufica race. 
[wa] muficayano=muficatnayanatsi. 
[wa] muficano=muficatnanatsi. 
(9) * sanghayano, ® sanghano-Sangha m-descendant. 
e sanghayani, * sanghant-Sangha f-descendant. 
e sanghayanarh, ° sanghanarh-Sangha race. 
[wa] sanghayano=sanghat+nayanatsi. 
[wa] sanghano=sangha+nanatsi. 
(10) * lomayano, * lomàno-Loma m-descendant. 
e Jomayani, ® lomàni-Loma f-descendant. 
* lomayanam, * lomanam-Loma race. 
[wa] lomayano=lomatnayanatsi. 
[wa] lomano=loma+nana+si. 
(11) * sakamayano, ® sakamano-Sakama m-descendant. 
e sakamayani, ° sakamani-Sakama f-descendant. 
e sakamayanam, ० sakamanam-Sakama race. 
[wa] sakamayano=sakamatnayanatsi. 
[wa] sakamano-sakama-nana-si. 
[^a" of Sakama is a vuddhi vowel] 
(12) * narayano, * narano-Nara m-descendant. 
* narayani, * narani-Nara f-descendant. 
e narayanam, ° naranam-Nara race. 


499 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


[wa] narayano- naratņāyana+si 

[wa] narano-nara-*nana-'si [first “a” of nara is a vuddhi vowel] 
(13) * corayano, * corano-Cora m-descendant. 

e corayani, * corani-Cora f-descendant. 

* corayanam, * coranam-Cora race. 

[wa] corayano-cora-*nayana-si. 

[wa] corano=corat+nanatsi. 
(14) * avasalayano, ° avasalano-Avasala m-descendant. 

e avasalayani, ° avasalani-Avasala f-descendant. 

e àvasalayanam, * avasalanarh-Avasala race. 

[wa] avasalayano-avasala-*nayana-si 

[wa] avasalano=avasala+nana+si 

[“a” of ava is vuddhi vowel] 
(15) * dvepayano, * dvepano-Dvipa m-descendant. 

e dvepayant, * dvepani-Dvipa f-descendant. 

* dvepayanam, * dvepanam-Dvipa race. 

[wa] dvepayano- dvipatnayanatsi 

[wa] dvepano= dvipa-*nana-si [*e" of dve is a vuddhi vowel] 
(16) * kuficayano, * kuficano-Kufica m-descendant. 

e kuficayant, ° kuficani-Kufica f-descendant. 

* kuficayanam, * kuficanam-Kufica race. 

[wa] kuficayano=kuficatnayanatsi. 

[wa] kuficano=kuficatnanatsi. 
(17) * kaccayano, * kaccano-Kacca m-descendant. 

e kaccayani, ® kaccani-Kacca f-descendant. 

* kaccayanam, * kaccanam-Kacca race. 

[wa] kaccayano-kacca-*nayana-si. 

[wa] kaccano-kacca-*nana-si. 


500 


Taddhita Kappa 


३४६, ३६७. णेय्यो कत्तिकादीहि 

346, 367. Neyyo kattika’ dihi. [Neyyo-kattika-adihi. 2 words] 

[V] Tehi gottaganehi kattika'dihi neyyapaccayo hoti và “tas- 
sa'pacca" micce'tasmim atthe. 


When expressing "the son or descendant of someone", an 
affix “neyya” is sometimes added after the feminine noun 
word “kattika etc". 


Note: "n" of neyya, is usually elided. Hence, only *eyya" will be left. 
See this pattern shown underlined in the examples. 


(1) kattikaya apaccam ® kattikeyyo-a woman named kattika’s 
m-descendant. 
[wa] kattikeyyo=kattikatneyyatsi 
* kattikaya apaccam va. 


Evam 
(2) * venateyyo-a woman named Vinata’s m-descendant. 
[wa] venateyyo=Vinatat+neyyatsi 
[“e” of ve is a vuddhi vowel] 
(3) * rohineyyo-a woman named Rohini’s m-descendant. 
[wa] rohineyyo=rohini+neyyatsi 
(4) ° gangeyyo-a woman named Ganga’s m-descendant. 
[wa] gangeyyo=gangatneyyatsi 
(5) * kaddameyyo-a woman named Kaddama’s m-descendant. 
[wa] kaddameyyo=kaddama+neyyatsi 
(6) * nadeyyo-a woman named Nadi's m-descendant. 
[wa] nadeyyo=naditneyyatsi [“a” of na is a vuddhi vowel] 
(7) * aleyyo-a woman named Ali’s m-descendant. 
[wa] aleyyo=ali+neyyatsi 
(8) * aheyyo-a woman named Ahi’s m-descendant. 
[wa] aheyyo=ahi+neyyatsi 
(9) * kameyyo-a woman named Kami’s m-descendant. 
[wa] kameyyo-kamr-neyya-si 
(10) * suciya-a woman named Suci or of a pure woman. apaccam. 
e SOCeyyO-a woman named Suci's m-descendant or a pure wom- 


501 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


an’s son. [wa] soceyyo=sucitneyyatsi [*o" of so is a vuddhi 
vowel] 
(11) * saleyyo-a woman named Sala’s m-descendant. 
[wa] saleyyo=sala+neyyatsi 
(12) * baleyyo-a woman named Bala’s m-descendant. 
[wa] baleyyo=bala+neyyatsi 
(13) * maleyyo-a woman named Mala’s m-descendant. 
[wa] maleyyo=malat+neyyatsi 
(14) * kaleyyo-a woman named Kalà's m-descendant. 
[wa] kaleyyo=kala+neyyatsi 


३४७, ३६८. ardt für ar 

347, 368. Ato ni VÀ. [Ato+ni+va. 3 words] 

[V] Tasma akarato nipaccayo hoti và 
“tassã’ pacca” micce'tasmim atthe. 


An affix “ni” is added after that a-ending noun to signify 
“the son or descendant of someone". 


Note: n of “ni” is usually elided. Hence, only “i” will be left. See this 
pattern shown in bold, underlined in the examples. 


(1) dakkhassa-of a person named “Dakkha”. apaccam. 
* dakkhi- Dakkha's son or descendant. 
[wa] dakkhi-dakkha-ni-si (*si" is elided) 
* dakkhassa apaccam va. 

(2) dunassa apaccam * doni-Duna's son or descendant. 
[wa] Doni=dunatni+si [*o" of do is a vuddhi vowel] 
* dunassa apaccam va. 


Evam 
(3) * vasavi-Vasava's son or descendant. 
[wa] vasavi=vasavadnidsi 
(4) * sakyaputti-Sakya's son or descendant. 
[wa] sakyaputti-sakyaputta--ni-*si 
(5) * nataputti-Nata’s son or descendant. 
[wa] nataputti=nataputta+ni+si [^à" of na is a vuddhi vowel] 


502 


Taddhita Kappa 


(6) * dasaputti-Dasa's son or descendant. 
[wa] dasaputti-dasaputta--ni*si 
(7) * dasavi-Dasava's son or descendant 
[wa] dasavi=dasava+ni+si 
(8) ° varunit-Varunpa's son or descendant 
[wa] varuni=varuna+ni+si [“a” of và is a vuddhi vowel] 
(9) * gandi-Ganda's son or descendant. 
[wa] gandi=gandatnitsi 
(10) * baladevi-Baladeva's son or descendant. 
[wa] baladevi-baladeva-ni-*si [“a” of bà is a vuddhi vowel] 
(11) * pavaki-Pavaka’s son or descendant 
[wa] pavaki=pavaka+nitsi 
(12) * jenadatti-Jinadatta's son or descendant. 
[wa] jenadatti=jinadatta+nitsi [“e” of je is a vuddhi vowel] 
(13) * buddhi-Buddha's son or descendant. 
[wa] buddhi=buddha+tni+si 
(14) * dhammi-Dhamma's son or descendant. 
[wa] dhammi=dhamma+ni+si 
(15) * sanghi-Sangha’s son or descendant. 
[wa] sanghi=Sangha+ni+si 
(16) * kappi-Kappa's son or descendant. 
[wa] kappi=kappatnitsi 
(17) * anuruddhi-Anuruddha's son or descendant. 
[wa] anuruddhi=anuruddha+ni+si 

















Va’ti vikappanatthena nikapaccayo hoti 
"tassapacca" miccetasmim atthe. 


| SF 


By means of the word which has a “vikappana” mean- 
ing, a “nika” affix is also applied after some nouns when 


expressing “the son or descendants of someone". 
[Vikappana- speculative possibility of grammatical application. See 
the affix shown underlined] 


(1) sakyaputtassa apaccam * sakyaputtiko-Sakyaputta's son or 
descendant. 
[wa] sakyaputtiko-sakyaputta-nika-si 


503 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


Evam 

(2) * nataputtiko-Nataputta's son or descendant. 
[wa] nataputtiko-nataputta-*nika-si 

(3) * jenadattiko-Jinadatta's son or descendant. 
[wa] jenadattiko-jinadatta-*-nika-si 


३४८, ३७१. णवोपक्वादीहि 

348, 371. Navo'pakva'dihi. [Navo-upaku-adithi. 2 words] 

[V] Upaku-icce’va’madthi navapaccayo hoti và “tassa’pacca” 
micce’tasmim atthe. 


An affix “nava” is added after the nouns “upaku (a person 
so-named)” etc. to express "the son or descendant of some- 
one". 

Note: “g” of nava is usually elided. Hence only “ava” will be left. See 
this pattern shown underlined in the first example. The same should be 
noted in subsequent Suttas. 


(1) upakussa-of a man named Upaku. apaccam. 
* opakavo-Upaku's son or descendant. 
[wa] opakavo=upaku+navatsi [*o" of opa is a vuddhi] 
* upakussa apaccam va. 

(2) manuno apaccam ® manavo-Manu’s son or descendant. 
[wa] manavo=manu+navatsi 
* manuno apaccam va. 

(3) bhaggussa apaccam * bhaggavo-Bhaggu's son or descendant. 
[wa] bhaggavo=bhaggu+navatsi 
* bhaggussa apaccam va. 

(4) pandussa apaccam * pandavo-Pandu's son or descendant. 
[wa] pandavo=pandu+navatsi 
* pandussa apaccam va. 

(5) bahussa apaccam * bahavo-Bahu's son or descendant. 
[wa] bahavo=bahut+navatsi 
* bahussa apaccam va. 


504 


Taddhita Kappa 


३४९, ३७२. णेर विधवादितो 
349, 372. Nera vidhava' dito. [Nera+vidhava-adito. 2 words] 
[V] Tasma vidhava'dito nerapaccayo hoti và 

"tassa'pacca" micce'tasmim atthe. 


An affix "nera" is sometimes added after the nouns “vi- 
dhava (a widow) etc.” to express “the son or descendant of 
someone". (vi-without-dhava-spouse, husband, i.e. widow) 


(1) vidhavaya-of widow. apaccam-son. ० vedhavero-Widow's 
son or descendant. 
[wa] vedhavero=vidhava+tneratsi [*e" of ve is a vuddhi] 
* vidhavaya apaccam va. 
(2) bandhukiya-of a person named Bandhuki. apaccarh. 
* bandhukero-Bandhuki's son or descendant. 
[wa] bandhukero-bandhuki-nera-*si 
* bandhukiya apaccarh va. 
(3) samanassa apaccam * samanero-Samana’s son, 
i.e. A novice who is like the preceptor's son. 
[wa] samanero=samana+neratsi [“a” of sa is a vuddhi] 
* samanassa apaccam va. 
Evarh-in this way. 
e samaneri-Samana’s daughter or i.e. A female-novice who is like 
the preceptor's daughter. 
[wa] samaneri=samana-+nera+i+si 
* samaneram-Samana's race. 
[wa] samaneram-samana-nera-*si 
(4) * nalikero-Nalika's son or m-descendant. 
[wa] nalikero=nalikat+neratsi 
* nalikert-Nàlika's daughter or f-descendant. 
[wa] nalikerr-nalika-nera-*1*si 
* nalikeram-Nalika's race. 
[wa] nalikeram-nalika-*nera-*si 


505 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


Ane’ka’ttha Taddhita 
[Aneka=na-notteka-one, i.e. not one but many, varioust+attha-meaning] 
(Nouns in affixes expressive of various meanings) 
Note: Suttas 350, 351, 352, 353 apply affixes expressive of various mean- 
ings. 


३५०, ३७३. येन वा dug तरति चरति वहति णिको 
350, 373. Yena va samsattham tarati carati vahati 
niko. 
[Yena+va+sarhsattham-+tarati+carati+vahatitniko. 7 words] 
[V] Yena và samsattham, yena và tarati, yena và carati, yena và 
vahati-icce'tesva'tthesu nikapaccayo hoti va. 





To express “being mixed in something as an ingredient, 
mode of crossing a river, mode of travel, mode of carrying 
something etc., an affix “pika” is sometimes added after the 


nouns. 
Note: Only “ika” will be left when “n” of nika is elided which is 


cee ९११ 


somewhat similar to English suffix “ic” or “ical”. The applied affix is 
shown underlined. 


Examples of “samsattha” which means “being mixed in as an in- 
gredient": 
(1) tilena-with sesame. samsattham-mixed. bhojanam-food. 

e telikarh-food mixed with sesame. 

[wa] telikarh=tilat+nikatsi [*e" of te is a vuddhi] 

* tilena samsattham va. (inapplicable example sentence) 
Evam 
(2) * golikam-food mixed with gula (molasses or jaggery). 

[wa] golikam-gula-nika-si [*o" of go is a vuddhi] 

(3) * ghatikam-food mixed with ghee. 

[wa] ghatikarh=ghatatnika+si [“a” of gha is a vuddhi] 
Examples of *tarati" which means “mode of crossing a river etc.”: 
(1) navaya-by boat. taratt’ti [tarati+iti] tarati-crosses. iti-so. 

naviko-is called “naviko”. ° naviko-traveler by boat. 

[wa] ° naviko=navatnikatsi 

* navaya tarati và. 


506 


Taddhita Kappa 


Note: Other connotations such as boat operator, owner or anyone con- 
nected with the Boat such as sailors can also be termed as nàviko. 
Evam 
(2) * olumpiko-traveller by raft (ulumpa). 
[wa] olumpiko-ulumpa-nika-si [“u” changes into “o” 
through vuddhi. So, *o" is a vuddhi vowel] 
Examples of *carati" which means “mode of travel or practice": 
(1) sakatena-by ox-drawn cart. carati’ti [carati+iti] carati-travels. 
० sakatiko-bullock-cart-traveler. 
[wa] sakatiko-sakata-*nika-*si 
* sakatena carati va. 
Evam-similarly in this way. 
(2) * pattiko-wing-traveler, bird. 
[wa] ° pattiko=pattat+nikatsi 
(3) * dandiko-the one moving with stick. 
[wa] ° dandiko=danda+nikat+si 
(4) * dhammiko-the one who practices Dhamma, the religious. 
[wa] ° dhammiko-dhamma-nika-*si 
(5) * padiko-foot-traveller, pedestrian. 
[wa] ° padiko=padatnikatsi 


Examples of *vahati" which means “mode of carriage": 
(1) sisena-by head. vahat?’ ti [vahati+iti] vahati-carries. 
e sIsiko-one who carries (something) on head. 
[wa] ° sisiko=sIsatnikatsi 
* stsena vahati va. 
(2) amsena-by shoulder. vahati'ti ® arnsiko-shoulder-carrier. 
[wa] * amsiko=amsatnikatsi 
* amsena vahati và. 
Evam-similarly in this way. 
(3) * khandhiko-shoulder-carrier. 
[wa] khandiko=khanda+tnikatsi 
(4) * anguliko-finger-carrier. 
[wa] anguliko-angula-*nika-si 


507 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


Va ti vikappanatthena afifiesu’pi nikapaccayo hoti. 


By means of the word “va” of *vikappana meaning”, 
a “nika” affix is also applied after some nouns. 


(1) rajagahe-in the city of Rajagaha. vasatiti [vasatititi] vasati- 
dwells. iti-therefore. ® rajagahiko-is called the resident of 
Rajagaha city. 

[wa] ° rajagahiko=rajagahatnikatsi 
* rajagahe vasati va. 

(2) rajagahe jato-born. * rajagahiko-the native of Rajagaha city. 
* rajagahe jato va. 

Evam 

(3) * magadhiko-the resident or native of Magadha. 

[wa] ° magadhiko=magadha+nikat+si 

(4) * savatthiko-the resident or native of Savatthi city. 
[wa] ° savatthiko=savatthit+nikatsi 

(5) * kapilavatthiko-the resident or native of Kapilavatthu city. 
[wa] ° kapilavatthiko-kapilavatthu--nika- si 

(6) * pataliputtiko-the resident or native of Pataliputta city. 

[wa] ° pataliputtiko=pataliputtat+nikatsi 

(7) * vesaliko-the resident or native of Vesal city. 
[wa] ° vesaliko=vesali+nika+si 


३५१, ३७४. तमधीते तेनकतादि सन्निधान नियोग सिप्प भण्ड जीविकत्थैसु च 

351, 374. Ta’madhite tena katadi, sannidhana, 
niyoga, sippa, bhanda, jivika'tthesu ca. 
[Tarm+adhite+tena katadi, sannidhana, niyoga, sippa, bhanda, 
jivika-atthesu-ca. 4 words] 

[V] Ta’madhite, tena kata'di-atthe, tamhi sannidhana, tattha 
niyutto, ta' massa sipparh, ta'massa bhandarh, ta’massa jivi- 
kam, icce’tesva’tthesu ca nikapaccayo hoti va. 

To express “the subject of study", “the mode or means by 
which something is done", “that in which something is orig- 
inated”, “where one is involved as a duty", "skill of sci- 
ence", “that which is possessed”, “livelihood” etc., an affix 


508 


Taddhita Kappa 


“nika” is sometimes added after the nouns to which the 
meaning is to be affected. 


Examples of “Adhite” which means “learning or subject of study”: 
(1) vinaya' madhite [vinayarn+adhite] vinayarh-Vinaya texts. 
adhite-(he) learns. iti-therefore. venayiko-is so called. 
* venayiko-Vinaya-learner. i.e. the student of Vinaya texts. 
[wa] * venayiko=vinayatnikatsi 
* vinaya’madhite va. 
Evam 
(2) * suttantiko-Suttanta-learner. i.e. Suttanta Student. 
[wa] suttantiko=suttantat+nikatsi 
(3) * abhidhammiko-Abhidhamma-learner. 
i.e. an Abhidhamma Student. 
[wa] abhidhammiko=abhidhamma+nika+si 
(4) * veyyakaraniko-vyakarana-learner. i.e. vyakarana-the 
grammar Student. (vyakarana means grammar) 
[wa] veyakaraniko=vyakaranatnikat+si 
Note: Although it is said in Sutta the word “adhite” and its related ED, 
the meaning thus implied can also be broadly taken as contextually var- 
iable and applicable. For example, when it refers to those who not only 
learn Suttanta, but also those who chant, teach or those who are expert 
in any respective subjects of Suttanta, Abhidhamma or Vinaya, it can be 
usually referred to as “Suttantika, Abhidhammika, or Venayika" and so 
on. 
Examples of “tena Katam" which means “modes of action": 
(1) kayena-by body. katarh-done. kammath-action. 
e kayikarh- bodily action. [wa] kayikam-kaya-nika-si 
* kayena katam kammar va. 
Evam 
(2) ° vacasikam-verbal action. 
[wa] vacasikarh=vacatnikatsi 
(3) * manasikarh-mental action. 
[wa] manasikam-mana-nika-si ["s" is inserted in front of 
"ika" as per the rule "adi" of Sutta 184 in these two examples] 


509 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


Examples of “Sannidhana” which means “originated in": 
(1) sarire-in the body. sannidhàna-existing. vedana-feeling. 
० saririka-the bodily feeling. i.e. bodily pain etc. 
[wa] saririka=sarirat+nikatsi 
* sarire sannidhana va. 
Evam 
(2) ° manasika-mental feeling. 
[wa] manasika=mana+tnikatsi 
Examples of “niyutta” which means “being involved in or related 
to”: 
(1) dvare-in the door. niyutto-involved (as a responsibility etc). 
* dovariko-the door-keeper, guard. 
[wa] dovariko=dvaratnikatsi 
* dvare niyutto va. 
Evam 
(2) * bhandagariko-the store-keeper or treasurer. 
[wa] bhandagariko=bhandagara+nika+tsi 
(3) * nagariko-the city-keeper. i.e. mayor, city-resident etc. 
[wa] nagariko=nagarat+nikatsi 
(4) * navakammiko-the new-deed keeper. i.e. one who is involved in 
a new project or action. 
[wa] navakammiko=navakamma+nikatsi 


Examples of “sippa” which means “profession or knowledge": 
(1) vina-(playing) harp. assa-of that person. Sipparh-is profession. 
* veniko-the harp-professional, the harpist. 
[wa] veniko-vina-nika-*si 
* vinà assa sippam va. 
Evam 
(2) * pāņaviko-the drum-professional, drummer. 
[wa] panaviko=panavatnikatsi 
(3) * modingiko-the tambourine-professional, tambourinist. 
[wa] modingiko=mudinga+nikatsi 
(4) ° varhsiko-the flute-professional, Flutist. 
[wa] vamsiko-vamsa-*nika-si 


510 


Taddhita Kappa 


Examples of “bhandarh” which means “merchandise”: 

(1) gandho-perfume or fragrance. assa-of that person. bhandam- 
(is) the merchandise. ० gandhiko-the perfume-trader, perfumer. 
[wa] gandhiko=gandha+nika+si 
* gandho assa bhandam va. 

Evam 

(2) * teliko-the cooking-oil trader. 
[wa] teliko=tila+nikatsi 

(3) * goliko-the molasses-trader. 
[wa] goliko=gulatnikatsi 


Examples of “jivika” which means “livelihood”: 
(1) urabbharh-sheep. hantva-having killed. JIvatr ti-lives (makes a 
living). * orabbhiko-sheep-butcher. 
[wa] orabbhiko=urabbha+nikat+si 
* urabbham hantva jivati va. 
(2) magam hantva jivati'ti ° magaviko-deer-butcher, hunter. 
[wa] magaviko=maga+tnikatsi 
* magam hantva jivati va. 
Evam 
(3) * sokariko-pig-butcher, pig-farmer. 
[wa] sokariko=stkaratnika+si 
(4) * sakuniko-bird-butcher. 
[wa] sakuniko=sakuna+nika+si 
Adiggahanena afifiattha’pi nikapaccayo yojetabbo. 
By means of the word “adi” in Sutta, *nika" affix can also 
be applied after some nouns (of other meanings). 
Below is a list of examples applicable by means of the word “adi”. 
Examples of “hata” which means “mode of killing for a living”: 
(1) jalena-by (casting) net. hato-(one) kills. ० jaliko-fisher-man. 
* jalena hato va. 
[wa] jaliko=jala+nikat+si 
(2) suttena-by thread. bandho-(one) binds. * suttiko-the thread- 


trapper (who sets traps by thread or strings to catch small creatures 
such as birds and wild rabbits etc.). 


511 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


[wa] suttiko=sutta+nikatsi 
* suttena bandho va. 


Examples of *avudha" which means “weapon”: 
(1) cápo-bow. assa-of that person. avudho-(is) weapon. 
* capiko-archer. 
[wa] capiko=capatnikatsi 
* capo assa avudho va. 
Evam 
(2) * tomariko-lance-armed. 
[wa] tomariko=tomara+nikatsi 
(3) * muggariko-club-bearer, club-armed. 
[wa] muggariko=muggara+nikat+si 
(4) * mosaliko-pestle-armed, or pestle-bearer. 
[wa] mosaliko=musalatnika+si 


Examples of *abadha" which means “disease or pain”: 
(1) vato-the wind (gas). assa abadho-(is) disease or pain. 
* vatiko-gas-pain sufferer. 
[wa] vatiko=vatatnika+si 
* vato assa abadho va. 
Evam 
(2) * semhiko-phlegm-caused pain sufferer. 
[wa] semhiko=semha+nika+si 
(3) * pittiko-bile-based pain sufferer. 
[wa] pittiko=pittat+nikatsi 
Examples of *pasanna" which means “being pleased with or being 
devoted to": 
(1) buddhe-in the Buddha. pasanno-(is) pleased. ० buddhiko-the 
one who is pleased in Buddha. i.e. a devotee of Buddha. 
[wa] buddhiko=buddha+nikatsi 
* buddhe pasanno va. 
Evam 
(2) dhammiko-the one who is pleased in Dhamma. i.e. a religious 
devotee. [wa] dhammiko-dhamma-nika-si 


512 


Taddhita Kappa 


(3) * sanghiko-the one who is pleased in Sangha. 

i.e. a Sangha-supporter devotee. (also spelled samgha) 
[wa] sanghiko=sangha+nikatsi 

Examples of “santakam” which means “possession, being owned 

by”: 

(1) buddhassa-of Buddha. santakarh-(is) possession. 

* buddhikam-Buddha's possession such as funds meant for 
shrine-renovation etc. [wa] buddhikam-buddha-nika-si 
* buddhassa santakam va. 

Evam 

(2) ° dhammikam-Dhamma's possession such as funds to print 
Dhamma-books etc. 

[wa] dhammikam-dhamma-nika-*si 

(3) * sanghikarh-Sangha’s possession such as temple building etc. 
[wa] sanghikarn=sangha+nikatsi 

Examples of “kitarh” which means “mode of purchase, being bar- 

tered with": 

(1) vatthena-by cloth. kitarh-bought. bhandam-the thing. 

* vatthikam-the thing bought by means of bartering with cloth. 
[wa] vatthikam-vattha-*nika- si 
* vatthena kitam bhandam va. 

Evam 

(2) * kumbhikam-anything bought with a measure of Kumbha. 
[wa] kumbhikarh=kumbha+nika+si 

(3) * phalikarh-anything bought with cotton. 

[wa] phalikarh=phalat+nika+si 

(4) ° kimkanikam-anything bought with small bell. 
[wa] kimkanikam-kimkana-nika-si 

(5) * sovannikam-anything bought with gold. 
[wa] sovannikarh=suvannatnikatsi 

Examples of *parimana" which means “measurement”: 

(1) kumbho-one measure of Kumbha. assa-of that thing. 
parimanarh-(is) measure. ° kumbhikarn-a thing of one 
Kumbha measure of grain. 

[wa] kumbhikam-kumbha-nika-*si 


513 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


* kumbho assa parimanam va. 


Examples of *rasi" which means “heap”: 

(1) kumbha'ssa [kumbho+assa] kumbho assa rasi-the heap. 
e kumbhikam-one-kumbha-measured heap of grains. 
kumbhassa ràsi và. [wa] is the same. 


Examples of *arahati" which means “deserve”: 

(1) kumbharh-for one Kumbha. arahatiti [arahati+iti] arahati-(he) 
deserves. iti-therefore. * kumbhiko-someone deserving one- 
Kumbha of grains. 

[wa] kumbhiko=kumbha+nika+si 
* kumbham arahati va. 


Examples of *dibbati" which means “to play a game of luck": 
(1) akkhena-by (throwing) dice. dibbatr ti [dibbati+iti] dibbati- 
(he) plays or gambles. iti ० akkhiko-dice-player, gambler. 

[wa] akkhiko=akkha+nika+si 
* akkhena dibbati va. 

Evam 

(2) * salakiko-the one who plays by using a small piece of cut- 
bamboo. [wa] salakiko=salakatnikat+si 

(3) * tindukiko-the one who plays using a tinduka seed, (tinduka- 
Diospyros Embryopteris, also called Indian persimmon or wild 
persimmon whose fruits are edible when ripe) 
[wa] tindukiko=tinduka+nikatsi 

(4) * ambaphaliko-the one who plays using mango seed. 
[wa] ambaphaliko=ambaphala+nikatsi 

(5) * kapitthaphaliko-the one who plays using the seed of a fruit 
called “Kapittha-Limonia Acidissima, also called wood apple". 
[wa] kapitthaphaliko=kapitthaphala+nikatsi 

(6) * nalikeriko-the one who plays using coconut shell. 
[wa] nalikeriko=nalikera+nikatsi 

icce’va’madi. 


514 


Taddhita Kappa 


३५२, ३७६. ण रागा तस्सेदमञ्ञत्थैसु च 
352, 376. Na raga tasse'da' maífifiatthesu ca. 
[Nat+raga+tassatidarhtanifatthesu+ca.6] 
[V] Napaccayo hoti va ragamha “tena rattarh” iccetasmim atthe, 
"tasse'dam" afifiatthesu ca. 





To express “that by which a specific color is dyed with, 
"that which it belongs to" etc, an affix "na" is sometimes 


added after the nouns. 
Note: “na” affix is invisible in the examples. 


Examples of *raga-dye": 
(1) kasavena-by yellow color. rattarh-dyed. vattharh-the cloth. 
e kasavarh-yellow-colored robe. 
[wa] kasavam-kasava-na-*si 
* kasavena rattam vattham va. 
Evam 
(1) ° kosumbharh-Safflower-colored cloth. 
[wa] kosumbharh=kusumbha+tnatsi 
(2) * haliddam-tumeric-colored cloth. 
[wa] haliddharh=haliddhatna+si 
(3) * patangam-red-colored cloth whose dye is available from the 
Sappan-wood tree (पतंग). [wa] pataügam-patanga-na-si 
(4) * rattangam-Hibiscus rosa sinensis-flower-colored cloth. 
[wa] rattangarh=rattangatnatsi 
(5) ° mafijittham-crimson-colored cloth (whose color is available 
from plants such as Indian madder plant). 
[wa] mafijittham- mafijittha +natsi 
(6) * kunkumath-saffron-colored cloth. 
[wa] kunkumarh=kunkuma+natsi 


Examples of "idam-(this) belongs to”: 

(1) sükarassa-(is) of pig. idarh-this. mamsam-meat. ० sokaram- 
pig's meat, i.e. pork. 
[wa] sokaram-sükara*na-*si 
* sükarassa idam mamsam va. 


515 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


Evam 
(2) ° mahimsam-meat of buffalo. 
[wa] mahimsam-mahimsa-na-si 


Examples of *avidüra-not far off, in proximity": 

(1) udumbarassa-(of) fig tree. avidüre-near. pavattam-that 
exists. vimanam-the mansion. ० odumbaram-the mansion near 
fig tree. 

[wa] odumbaram-udumbara-*na-*si 
* udumbarassa avidüre pavattam vimanam va. 

(2) vidisaya-(of) the corner or a city so-named. avidüre-nearby. 
nivaso-the residence. * vediso-the residence near corner or near a 
city so-named. 

[wa] vediso=vidisatnatsi 
vidisaya avidüre nivaso va. 
Note: Vedisa (बैदिशम्‌) is translated as a city so-named located in the 
neighbourhood where the river Vidisa flows. [Siddhanta Kaumudi by 
Srisa Chandra Vasu, Sutta Number 1282] 
Examples of “jata-native”: 
(1) mathuraya-at the city of Mathura. jato-(he) was born. 
* mathuro-the native of Mathura. 
[wa] mathuro=mathurat+natsi 
* mathuraya jato va. 


ea 


Examples of “agata-comer”: 

(1) mathuraya-from the city of Mathura. agato-came. * mathuro- 
the person coming from the city of Mathura. 
* mathuraya agato va. 


The Names of Twelve Months 

Examples of “niyutta-being related to or with”: 
kattikaya-with the star named “Kattika”. niyutto-(prominently) re- 
lated. maso-the month, i.e. the month when a star named Kattika is 
prominent. 
(1) * kattiko-the month when the star named “Kattika (Krittika)" is 

prominent. [wa] kattiko=kattika+natsi 

* kattikaya niyutto maso va. 


516 


Taddhita Kappa 


Evam 

(2) ° magasiro-the month when the star?” named “Migasira (Mrgasi 
ra)" is prominent. (ED: magasirena yutto maso=magasiro) 
[wa] magasiro=magasira+natsi 

(3) * phusso-the month when the star named “Phussa (Pusyami)" is 
prominent. (ED: phussena yutto maso=phusso) 
[wa] phusso-phussa-na-si 

(4) ° magho-the month when the star named “Magha” is prominent. 
(ED: maghena yutto maso=magho) 
[wa] magho=magha+natsi 

(5) * phagguno-the month when the star named “Phagguni (Phal 
gunt)" is prominent. (ED: phagguniya yutto maso-phagguno) 
[wa] phagguno=phagguni+na+si 

(6) * citto-the month when the star named “Citta (Chitra)” is promi- 
nent. (ED: cittaya yutto maso=citto) 
[wa] citto=cittat+natsi 

(7) * vesakho-the month when the star named “Visakha” is promi- 
nent. (ED: visakhaya yutto maso=vesakho) 
[wa] vesakho=visakha+natsi 

(8) * jettho-the month when the star named “Jettha (Jyestha)” is 
prominent. (ED: jetthaya yutto maso=jettho) 
[wa] jettho=jettha+natsi 

(9) * asalho-the month when the star named *Asalha (asadha)” is 
prominent. (also spelled 5५9111) 
(ED: asalhaya yutto maso-asal[ho) 
[wa] asalho=asalhat+natsi 

(10) * savano-the month when the star named “Savana (Sravana)" is 


27 The star is an equivalent of the Pali term “nakkhatta (नक्षत्त)” which is 
not shown in the original text, but contextually applicable. It refers to 
a specific lunar mansion of the month. In WA of each word which 
signifies the respective month, the original gender of the term repre- 
senting the lunar mansion is shown in their base-vowel endings as per 
the rule of the grammar. EDs are not from the original text. 


517 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


prominent. (ED: savanena yutto maso=savano) 
[wa] savano=savanatnatsi 

(11) * bhaddo-the month when the star named “Bhaddra (Bhadrapa- 
da)" is prominent. (also found as potthapada in Devanagari edition) 
(ED: bhaddena yutto maso=bhaddo) 
[wa] bhaddo=bhadda+na+si 

(12) * assayujo-the month when the star named “Assayuja (A$vini)" 
is prominent. (ED: assayujena yutto maso=assayujo) 
[wa] assayujo=assayujatnatsi 


Na vuddhi nila, pita’do, paccaye sanakarake. 
Phakaro phussasaddassa, “siro” ti sirasam vade. 


No vuddhi function is applied in the words “nila” and 
“pita”, though an n-joined-affix is present. 

No vuddhi ever occurs in the “pha” of “phussa”, 

No extra “sa” is ever inserted after the word “siro”, 
So it is not said as "sirasam". 








Explanation 

This stanza shows that there can never be an absolute rule regarding the rules 
of morphological procedures as prescribed in the Suttas. Sometimes, in some 
instances, that rule is not applied. Thus leaving room for any exception for 
variable outcome of the words as the pattern of common spoken language 
may prevail sometimes despite the prescribed grammatical rules. In the ex- 
amples of words cited, all the three words have an n-joined-na affix applied 
as per this Sutta. With an n-joined-affix being present in the words, both “1” 
of Nila-blue-dyed cloth and Pita-yellow-dyed cloth, also the vowel *u" of 
Phusso, should have seen a vuddhi process occurred. Thus possibly affecting 
to change into other word-forms such as Nela, Peta and Phossa. But it never 
had occurred as common usage pattern of the language is only Nila, Pita and 
Phussa. Similarly, if an additional consonant “s” is to be attached to the arn- 
vibhatti-ending word “siro-head”, then it should have become “sirasarh” 
instead. But it remained unchanged though. Therefore, sometimes there may 
be some exceptions to any prescribed grammatical rule as and when dic- 
tated by the prevalent common norms and patterns of the language in the 
society. This is what the stanza means. 


Examples of *samüha-collective grouping": 
(1) sikkhanarh-of the precepts. samüho-collection. 


518 


Taddhita Kappa 


* sikkho-the collection of the precepts. 
[wa] sikkho=sikkha+natsi 
(2) bhikkhanam-of dishes. samüho ® bhikkho-motley of dishes. 
[wa] bhikkho=bhikkha+natsi 
Evam 
(3) * kapoto-the group of pigeons. 
[wa] kapoto=kapota+na+si 
(4) * mayuro-the group of peacocks. 
[wa] mayüro-mayüra-na-si 
(5) * kokilo-the group of koel birds (i.e. black cuckoo, which has a 
sweet voice.) 
[wa] kokilo-kokila-na-*si 


Examples of “devata-being devoted like a deity": 

(1) buddho-Buddha. assa-of that person. devata-(is like) deity. 
* buddho-the one who devotes Buddha like a deity. 
[wa] buddho=buddha+na+si 

Evam 

(2) * bhaddo-the one who devotes Bhadda like a deity. 
[wa] bhaddo-bhadda-*na*si 

(3) * maro-the one who devotes Mara like a deity. 
[wa] maro=mara+natsi 

(4) * mahindo-the one who devotes a deity named Mahinda. 
[wa] mahindo=mahinda+na+si 

(5) * vessavano-the one who devotes a deity named Vessavana. 
[wa] vessavano=vessavanatnatsi 

(6) * yamo-the one who devotes a deity named Yama. 
[wa] yamo=yama+tnatsi 

(7) ० Somo-the one who devotes a deity named Soma. 
[wa] somo=soma-+natsi 

(8) * narayano-the one who devotes a deity named Narayana. 
[wa] narayano-narayana-*na-*si 

Examples of “being related for a certain period such as a year etc. 

or being related to a skill of knowledge": 

(1) samvacchara' madhite [sarhvacchararhradhite] samvaccha- 
ram-for (the whole) year. adhite-(he) learns. 


519 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


* samvaccharo-annual learner, yearly student. 
[wa] sarnvaccharo=samvaccharatnatsi 
Evam 
(2) * mohutto-the one who studies for a moment, part-time student. 
[wa] mohutto=muhutta+natsi 
(3) * nemitto-the one who studies about interpreting various omens 
and signs. 
[wa] nemitto=nimittat+natsi 
(4) * angavijjo-the one who studies physiognomy. 
[wa] angavijjo=angavijjatnatsi 
(5) * veyyakarano-the one who studies grammar, the grammar- 
student. 
[wa] veyyakarano=vyakaranatnatsi 
(6) * chando-the one who studies prosody and the art of writing 
metrical stanzas, the student of prosody. 
[wa] chando=chanda+natsi 
(7) * bhasso-the one who studies commentaries. 
[wa] bhasso=bhassatnatsi 
(8) * cando-the one who studies a text named Canda. 
[wa] cando-canda-*na-si 





Examples of “visaya-domain or a specifically reserved place etc.”: 
(1) vasadanam-of lions, visayo-domain, deso-location, 
* vasado-the lion’s den. 
[wa] vasado=vasadatnatsi 
Evam 
(2) * kumbho-the place of pots. 
[wa] kumbho=kumbha+natsi 
(3) * sakunto-the place of birds. 
[wa] Sakunto=sakuntat+natsi 
(4) * atisaro-the place of guests. 
[wa] atisaro=atisaratnatsi 
(5) udumbara-fig trees. asmirh-at that. padese-location. sant?’ ti 


[santi+iti] santi-(there) are. ० odumbaro-the place where there 
are fig trees. 
[wa] odumbaro=udumbara+natsi 


520 


Taddhita Kappa 


The following examples are of different meanings. 

(1) sagarehi-by the princes called Sagara. nibbatto-made. 
* Sagaro-the place made by Sagara, i.e. ocean. 
[wa] sagaro=sagara+natsi 


The examples with meaning of *being resident and chief". 

(1) sagala’ massa [sagalarn+assa] sagalarh-city of Sagala. assa-of 
that person. NIVASO-(is) residence. ® sagalo-the resident of Sāga- 
la. [wa] sagalo=sagala+natsi 

(2) (a) mathura assa nivaso ° mathuro-the resident of Mathura. 
[wa] mathuro=mathurat+natsi 
(b) mathuraya-at Mathura. issaro-(is) chief. « mathuro-the 
chief of Mathura. Note: WA is similar. 

Icce’va’madayo yojetabba. 

Icce' va’ madayo-such examples. yojetabba-should be applied. 


३५३, ३७८. जातादीन मिमिया च 
353, 378. Jata' dina" mi miyà ca. 
[Jata-adinam-- ima, iyatca. 3 words] 
[V] Jata-icce’va’ma’dina’matthe ima, iyapaccaya honti. 


To express “when and where it happens or in which species 
one is born into etc." the affixes "ima, iya" are added after 
the nouns to denote it. [See the applied affixes shown underlined.] 


ima-affix examples: 

(1) paccha-in the back or at a later time. Jato-(it) was. 
° pacchimo- that which happens later, the latter, the last. 
[wa] pacchimo=paccha+imatsi 

Evam 

(2) * antimo-that which happens in the end, the last. 
[wa] antimo=antatimatsi 

(3) * majjhimo-that which happens in the center, the middle. 
[wa] majjhimo=majjhat+imatsi 

(4) * purimo-that which happens in the beginning, the first. 
[wa] purimo=pura+imatsi 





521 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


(5) * uparimo-that which happens above. 
[wa] uparimo=upari+ima+si 
(6) * hetthimo-that which happens down below. 
[wa] hetthimo=hettha+ima+si 
(7) * gopphimo-that which happens on metatarsal surface of the feet. 
[wa] gopphimo=goppha+ima+si 
iya-affix examples: 
(1) bodhisattajatiya-by birth as Bodhisatta. jato-was born. 
* bodhisattajatiyo-the one who was born as a Bodhisatta. 
[wa] bodhisattajatiyo-bodhisattajati-iya-si 
Evam 
(2) * assajatiyo-the one which was born as a horse, i.e. horse-species. 
[wa] assajatiyo=assajatitiyatsi 
(3) * hatthijatiyo-the one which was born as an elephant. 
[wa] hatthijatiyo=hatthiyati+iyatsi 
(4) * manussajatiyo-the one who was born as a human. 
[wa] manussajatiyo=manussajatitiyatsi 


Adiggahanena niyuttattha'dito'pi tadassattha’dito’pi ima, 
iya,ika-icce'te paccaya honti. 
By means of the word “adi” in Sutta, the “ima, iya, ika” af- 
fixes can also be applied after some nouns to express "per- 
taining to” and “a qualitative inherent characteristic or a 
possession". 
Examples of "pertaining to": 
(1) ante-in the end. niyutto-(is) related. ° antimo-that which is 
related to the end, i.e. the end, the final. 
[wa] antimo-anta-*ima-si 
Evam 
* antiyo, * antiko-that which is related to the end i.e. the end, the 
final. (the same meaning, but with different affix) 
[wa] antiyo=antatiyatsi [wa] antiko=antatikatsi 


Examples of "having something as an inherent quality etc": 
(2) putto-son. assa-of that person. atthi-(there) is. tasmirh-in that 
person. Và-in other way. Vijjati’ti [vijjatit+iti] vijjati-has. iti- 


522 


Taddhita Kappa 


therefore. puttimo-is so called. ® puttimo-the one who has son 
(child). [wa] puttimo=puttatimarsi 
Note: The words “tasmim va vijjati’ti” themselves show one more 
possible ED of "puttimo". See such similar EDs in Suttas starting from 
364 to 371. The nipata word “va” indicates other possible method. 
Evam 
* puttiyo, * puttiko-the one who has son (child). (the same meaning 
but with different affix) 
[wa] puttiyo=puttatiyat+si [wa] puttiko=puttatikatsi 
(3) * kappimo, * kappiyo, * kappiko-the one who has plan and 
thought 
[wa] kappimo-kappa-ima-si 
[wa] kappiyo=kappatiyatsi 
[wa] kappiko-kappa--ika-si 














Caggahanena kiyapaccayo hoti niyutta’tthe. 


By means of the word “ca” in Sutta, the affix “kiya” can al- 

so be applied after some nouns in the sense of “pertaining 

to”. 

Examples: 

(1) Jattyam-in the conception or in birth. niyutto-(is) related. 
e jatikiyo-birth-related, inborn, innate 
[wa] jatikiyo=jatit+kiyat+si 

(2) andhe-in being blind. niyutto-(is) related. ® andhakiyo- 
blindness-related. 
[wa] andhakiyo=andha+kiyatsi 

(3) jatiya-by birth. andho-(is) blind. * jaccandho-blind by birth, 
i.e. an inborn blindness. [Tatiya Tappurisa, this is called a minor 
ED shown for partial word “jaccandhao”, an incomplete ED] 
jaccandhe-in being born blind. niyutto-(is) related. 
* jaccandhakiyo-the one who is born blind. 
[This is final complete ED for the whole word, 2 EDs for this word] 
[wa] jaccandhakiyo-jaccandha--kiya-si 





Samüha Taddhita 
(Nouns in affixes expressive of collective grouping) 
Note: Suttas 354, 355 apply the affixes expressive of collective grouping. 


523 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


३५४, ३७९. समूहत्ये कणूणा 

354, 379. Samüha'tthe kan,na. 
[Samtha-atthe+kan, na. 2 words] 

[V] Samüha'tthe kan,na-iccete paccaya honti. 


When expressing a collective assembly, the affixes “kan, 
na" are added after the nouns to denote it. 

Note: In the affix “kag”, only “k” will be seen in the example while the 
affix "n" is almost unnoticeable. See the two examples in each set. the 
first is “kan-affixed” example where “k” is shown underlined. The sec- 


ond is an n-affixed example where the applied affix is invisible. 
[samüha-collective group] 


(1) rajaputtanarh-of the king's son, i.e. of the princes. samüho- 
group. * rajaputtako-the collective group of princes. 
[wa] rajaputtako=rajaputta+kantsi 

Evam 
e rājaputto-the collective group of princes. 
[wa] rajaputto=rajaputtatnatsi 

(2) * manussako, * mānusso-the collective group of men. 
[wa] manussako=manussa+kan+si 
[wa] manusso-manussa-*na-si 

(3) * mayürako, * màayüro-the collective group of peacocks. 
[wa] mayürako-mayüra-*kan-si 
[wa] mayüro-mayüra-na-si 

(4) * mahimsako, * mahimso-the collective group of buffaloes. 
[wa] mahimsako-mahimsa-tkan-si 
[wa] mahimso=mahimsa+natsi 





३५५, ३८०. गामजनबन्धुसहायादीहि ता 
355, 380. Gama, jana, bandhu, sahaya'dihi ta. 
[Gama, jana, bandhu, sahaya-adthi+ta. 2 words] 
[V] Gama,jana,bandhu,sahaya, icce’va’madihi ta-paccayo 
hoti samüha'tthe. 


524 


Taddhita Kappa 
To express a collective grouping, an affix “ta” is added af- 
ter the nouns gama (villages), jana (people), bandhu (relatives), 
sahaya (friends) etc. to denote it. 
[See the affix shown underlined in the examples] 


(1) gamanarh-of the villages. samüho-group. 
* gamata-the collective group of villages. 
[wa] gamata=gama-+tatsi (“si” is to be elided) 

Evam 

(2) * janatà-the collective group of people. 
[wa] janata=jana+ta+si 

(3) ° bandhuta-the collective group of relatives. 
[wa] bandhuta=bandhu-+ta+si 

(4) * sahayata-the collective group of friends. 
[wa] sahayata=sahayattatsi 

(5) * nagarata-the collective group of cities. 
[wa] nagarata=nagara+tatsi 


Ta’dassathana Taddhita 
(Nouns in affixes expressive of the source or the cause) 
३५६, ३८१. तदस्स ठानमियो च 
356, 381. Ta'dassa thana' miyo ca. 
[Tarn+assa+thanam+iyotca. 5 words] 
[V] “Tadassa thana" micce'tasmim atthe iyapaccayo hoti. 





When expressing an instigating source or a cause for pas- 
sion, arrest, release, joy, etc. an affix “iya” is added after 
the nouns to denote it. (The affix is shown underlined in the exam- 
ples) [Ta'dassathana-tam-that*assa-of that infatuation etc.+thana-is 
the source. Here, “th” becomes “d” as per Sutta 31] 


(1) madanassa-of being infatuated or inebriated. thanam-(is) cause 
or source. * madaniyath-the source of infatuation or inebriation, 
something alluring or extremely tempting or attractive thus causing 
lust or madness etc. 


[wa] madaniyamm=madanatiyatsi 
(2) bandhanassa-of getting arrested. thanam ० bandhaniyam-the 


525 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


cause of imprisonment. 
[wa] bandaniyam-bandana-ya-*si 
(3) mucchanassa-of intoxication. thanam ° mucchaniyam-the 


source of intoxication, i.e. sensual pleasures, alcohol and something 


very confusing etc. 
[wa] mucchaniyam-mucchana-iya-si 
Evam 
(4) * rajaniyam-the source of desire or craving, the thing which 
arouses desire, lust etc. 
[wa] rajaniyarh=rajanatiyatsi 
(5) * kamaniyath-the source of pleasure, pleasing 
[wa] kamaniyarh=kamanatiyatsi 





(6) ० gamaniyamr-the source of going, somewhere one should go and 


see, worth going to see. 
[wa] gamaniyam-gamana-iya-tsi 

(7) * dussaniyam-the source of anger, causing anger. 
[wa] dussaniyarh=dussanatiyatsi 

(8) * dassaniyam-the source of seeing, something deserving to see, 
attractive. 
[wa] dassanityam-dassana-1ya-si 











Note: This affix is somewhat confusable with a Kita-affix “antya” ap- 
plied by Sutta 540. Remember the distinction between two affixes. The 


Kita affix has an ‘T’ and this affix has a shortened “i”. 


Upama Taddhita 
(Nouns in the affix expressive of analogous similitude) 


३५७, ३८२. उपमत्थायितत्तं 

357, 382. Upamattha’yitattam. 
[Upama-atthe-ayitattam. 2 words] 

[V] Upama’tthe ayitattapaccayo hoti. 


When expressing a simile or a metaphoric likeness, an 


"ayitatta" affix is added after the noun to denote it. 
[upama-comparing, likening by means of an analogy or a metaphor] 
(See the affix “ayitatta” shown underlined.) 


(1) dhümo-smoke. viya-like. dissati-looks. adum-that. vanarh- 


526 


Taddhita Kappa 


forest, i.e. that forest looks like smoke. ta' didam [tarh+idarh] 
tam idarh-that forest. dhümayitattam-is so called. 
e dhumayitattarh- the smoky forest (whose color is like green- 
greyish when seen from a distant). 
[wa] dhümayitattam-dhüma-ayitatta-tsi 

(2) timiram viya-like darkness. dissati adurh vanam ta' didam 
* timirayitattam-the darkish-looking forest. 
[wa] timirayitattam-timira-ayitatta-si 


Tannissita Taddhita 
(Nouns in affix expressive of dependent nature and source") 


३५८, ३८३. तनिस्सितत्थे लो 


3 58, 383. Tannissita’tthe lo. [Tannissita-atthe+lo. 2 words] 
[V] “Tannissitatthe,tadassa thana" micce'tasmim atthe ca 
lapaccayo hoti. 


To express that *on which something depends or being as- 
sociated to or being the source of ", the “la” affix is to be 
added after the noun to denote it. 
[Tam-to that-nissita-dependent. The “m” becomes “n” by Sutta 31 
word. See affix “I” with one more reduplicated *T" together in the ex- 
amples shown in bold, underlined. “arh” is derivative morpheme of 
*si"] 
(1) dutthu-bad or indecent nature. nissitarh-related to. 
e dutthullarh-related to bad nature, indecent, obscene. 
[wa] dutthullarn=dutthut+latsi 
(2) vedam-joy. nissitarh ® vedallarh-relating to joy, joyous. 
[wa] vedallam-veda--la-*si 
The following are different EDs of the same examples. Note that in the 
EDs, the word “thana-cause” is used in place of *nissita": 
(1) dutthu-of bad or indecent nature. {hanarh-(is) the cause, the 
point. 
° dutthullam-the cause or the point of bad, indecent. 
(2) vedassa-of joy. thanam * vedallam-the cause of joy. 
[wa] is very much the same. 





527 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


Tabbahula Taddhita 
(Nouns in affix expressive of the prominent nature) 


३५९, ३८४. MY THES 
359, 384. Alu tabbahule. [Alu+tabbahule. 2 words] 
[V] Alupaccayo hoti tabbahula ’ tthe. 


To express “a state of being a common prominent nature", 
an “alu” affix is added after the noun to denote it. [ta-that na- 
ture+bahula-being much, prominent. One “b” augmented. See the affix 


shown underlined. ] 


(1) abhijjha-covetousness. assa-of that person. pakati-(is) nature, 
i.e. covetousness is the nature of that person. ® abhijjhalu-the one 
whose nature is covetousness. (This ED is different which uses the 
word “pakati-nature”). abhijjha assa bahula-(is) usual nature. 
va-to explain other method. ® abhijjhalu-the one who is usually 
covetous. (This ED is different as it uses the word “bahula-usually 
much"). 

[wa] abhijjhalu-abhijjha--alu-si [abhijjha is permanently a 
feminine gender noun word ending in *a"] 

Evam 

(2) ° sitalu-one whose nature is cold, or the one who is usually cold 
i.e. the one who is intolerant of cold and used to catch cold easily 
due to such a weak bodily nature. 

[wa] sitalu=sita-cold+alut+si 

(3) * dhajalu-the place or building where there are a lot of banners. 
[wa] dhajalu-dhaja-banner*alu-si 

(4) * dayalu-the one whose nature is compassion, or the one who is 
usually compassionate. [daya is a feminine gender noun] 

[wa] dayalu=daya-kindness+alu+tsi 














Bhava Taddhita 
(Nouns in affix expressive of the abstract condition) 
Note: Suttas 360, 361, 362 apply affixes to form abstract nouns 
expressive of condition or state or a qualitative character of 
someone or something. The affixes are similar to English affixes 
such as “hood, ship" from the words “boyhood, lordship” etc. 


528 


Taddhita Kappa 


3&0, ३८७. ण्यत्तता "Td तु 
360, 387. Nya,tta,ta bhave tu. 


[Nya, tta, tat+bhave+ttu. 3 words] 
[V] Nya,tta,ta-icce'te paccaya honti bhava’ tthe. 


When expressing a bhava, (a state of being so and so, a sit- 
uation, or a qualitative character of someone or something), 
the affixes "nya, tta, ta” are added after the noun to denote 
it. [Applied affixes are shown underlined.] 


nya-affix example: 

(1) alasassa-of being lazy. bhavo-is state. ® alasyam-the state of 
being lazy, the laziness. 
[wa] alasyarh=alasa+nyatsi [alasa-being lazy] 

(2) arogassa-of being healthy. bhavo-is state. ® arogyam-the 
state of being healthy, the healthiness. 
[wa] arogyam-aroga*nya-*si [a-without*roga-disease] 


tta-affix example: 

(1) pamsukülikassa-of being a practitioner of Parhsukilika austerity- 
practice. bhavo-is state. * pamsukülikattam-practitioner-hood 
of Pamsukülika austerity-practice. 

[wa] pamsukülikattam-pamsukülika--tta-si 

Note: parhsu-earth, dusty+kula=edges of clothtika & tta are two af- 

fixes. The word refers to an austerity practice done by monks in ancient 

times of Buddha who wear the robes made up of rag clothes discarded 
by people and stitched together and dyed in maroon or saffron color. 

(2) anodarikassa-of being an anodarika. bhavo-is state. 

e anodarikattam-the state of being an anodarika. 
[wa] anodarikattarh=anodarika+ttat+si 

Note: Anodarika=na-not+odarika-stomach-caring, i.e. always caring 

and paying priority to fill up one's stomach. It is more of an analogical 

statement figuratively referring to the one who cares only about materi- 
al needs of this life, not about spiritual progress nor moral integrity. 

[odarika-udara-stomach-ika-concerned, pertaining to. “u” is trans- 

formed into “0” through vuddhi procedure.] 





ta-affix example: 


529 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


(1) sanganika’ramassa-of being gregarious. bhavo-is state. 
e sanganika'ramatà-gregariousness, being fond of socializing. 
[wa] sanganikaramata=sanganikarama+ta+si 
Note: San’ ganika’rama=sam-being together-ganika-friendship, be- 
ing social+arama-enjoying. i.e. spending more of one's time in social- 
izing and paying priority to it rather than important things. 
(2) nidda’ramassa-of being indolent. bhavo-is state. 
* nidda’ramata-state of being indolent, slothfulness. 
[wa] niddaramata=niddarama+ta+si 
Note: nidda=sleep+arama-enjoying. i.e. always spending time sleep- 
ing, no meditation, nor any study nor doing anything worthwhile. 
Tuggahanena ttanapaccayo hoti. 


By means of the word “tu” in Sutta, the affix “ttana” can 
also be applied after some nouns in the sense of bhava. 
(1) * puthujjanattanarh-state of being unenlightened, a common 
worldling who is still a victim of defilements. 
[wa] puthujjanattanam-puthujjana--ttana-si 
(2) ° vedanattanarh-the state of feeling. 
[wa] vedanattanarh=vedana+ttanat+si 








३६१, ३८८. ण विसमादीहि 

361 छ, 388 Na visama'dihi. [Nat+visama-adihi. 2 words] 

[V] Napaccayo hoti visama'dihi “tassa bhavo" iccetasmim at- 
the. 


To express a bhava, (a state of being so and so, a situation 
or a qualitative character of someone or something), an af- 


fix “na” is added after the words visama (non-level land) etc. 
[Note: The affix “na” is invisible in the examples.] 


(1) visamassa-of being uneven. bhavo-is state. ० Vesamarh-state 
of being uneven, ruggedness, uneven-ness, non-level place of the 
earth. 

[wa] vesamarh=visamatnatsi 

Note: Sometimes, this word is figuratively used to express crookedness 

of mind or actions of being dishonest. 


530 


Taddhita Kappa 


(2) sucissa-of being pure. bhavo-is state. * socath-state of purity. 
[wa] socarh=suci+natsi 


३६२, ३८९. रमणीयादितो कण्‌ 

362, 389 Ramaniya'dito kan. [Ramaniya-aditot+kan. 2 words] 

[V] Ramaniya-icce' va' madito kanpaccayo hoti “tassa bhavo” 
icce’tasmim atthe. 


When expressing a bhava, (a state of being so and so, a sit- 
uation or a qualitative character), an affix “kan” is added 


after the words “ramantya (being pleasant)" etc, to denote it. 
Note: In the affix "kan", the joint word “an” has to be elided. So, only 
“k” is visible. It is shown in bold, underlined. 


(1) ramantyassa-of being pleasant. bhavo-is state. 
* ramaniyakam-pleasantness. 
[wa] ramaniyakarh=ramantyat+kan+si 

(2) manufifiassa-of being enjoyable. bhavo-is state. 
e manufitiakam-enjoyability. 
[wa] manufifiakam-manufifia-kan-si 


Visesa Taddhita 
(Nouns in affix expressive of superlative-comparison) 


३६३, ३९०. fade तरतमिसिकियिट्टा 
363, 390. Visese tara,tami'siki' yittha. 
[Visese+tara, tama, isika, iya, ittha. 2 words] 

[V] Visesa’ tthe tara,tama,isika,iya,ittha-icce’te paccaya honti. 
To express a visesa (a comparative comparison for the su- 
perlative), the affixes “tara, tama, isika, iya, ittha" are to 
be added after the nouns to denote it. [Visesa-distinction] 

Note: The affixes are to be grouped into two: 
(a) tara, tama are the first group. 
(b) isika, iya and ittha are the second group. 


The order of superlative degree is as per the sequence of each affix. 
For example, tara is positive while tama is superlative. Similarly, isika 


531 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


is positive, iya is comparative and ittha is superlative. Sometimes, the 
words in a combination of two superlative affixes are found to be used 
frequently. E.g. setthataro-the most best. [Here, both ittha and tara af- 
fixes are applied. See all the affixes shown underlined in the examples 
below.] 


The examples of first group affixes 

(1) sabbe-all. ime-these. papa-(are) bad. aya'mimesam 
[ayarht+imesarh] ayarh-this one. imesarh-among or of these. 
visesena-especially. pàpo'ti [७३०] papo-(is) bad. iti- 
therefore. papataro-is so called, i.e. These are bad. Of all these 
bad, this one is especially bad. So, it is called *papataro" [tara]. 
* papataro-specially bad among the bad. i.e. especially bad of the 
bad. 
[wa] pàpataro-papa-tara-si 

Evam-in this way. 

(2) [tama] * papatamo-the most bad, the worst. 
[wa] papatamo=papattamatsi 


The second group affixes 
(1) [isika] * papisiko-specially bad. 
[wa] papisiko=papatisika+si 
(2) [iya] * papiyo-more bad. 
[wa] papiyo=papat+iyatsi 
(3) [ittha] * papittho-the most bad or the worst. 
[wa] papittho=papatitthatsi 


Ta’dassa’tthi Taddhita 
(Nouns in affixes expressive of possessed quality or inherent nature) 
Note: Suttas 364, 365, 366, 367, 368, 369, 370, apply affixes expressive of 
quality or nature possessed by someone or inherent in something. 


३६४, ३९८. तदस्सत्थीति वी च 

364, 398. Ta'dassa'tthr'ti vi ca. 
[Tarmt+assatatthitititvi+ca. 6 words] 

[V] "Ta'dassatthi" icce'tasmim atthe vipaccayo hoti. 





532 


Taddhita Kappa 


When expressing a *ta'dassa'tthi", a quality being pos- 
sessed by someone (or something), the affix *vr" is added 
after the noun denoting the quality or character. 

(See the affix shown underlined) 

Note: [ta’dassa’tthi=tarh-that quality or naturet+assa-of that person or 

thing-atthi-is] 

(1) medha-intellect or wisdom. yassa-of whose. atthi-there is. 
tasmith-in that person. Và-to show another method. vijJatr ti. 
[vijjati*iti] Vijjati-has. iti-therefore. medhavi-is so-called. 

e medhavi-the one who has intellect or wisdom, the wise. 
[wa] medhavi=medha-+vi+si 

Note: There are two methods of ED for this word *medhavr". 

(a) One uses dative-case word “assa” and an akyáta verb "atthi". 

(b) The other uses locative-case word “tasmirh” and Akhydta verb 
*vijjati". There is not much difference in the meaning of both 
EDs. Throughout this category of “ta’dassa’tthi” taddhita, there 
will be such kind of EDs shown in both methods. 


Evam 

(2) * mayavi-the one who has deceit, deceitful. 
[wa] mayavi=maya+vitsi 

Caggahanena so-paccayo hoti. 


By means of the word “ca” in Sutta, the affix “so” can also 
be applied after some nouns in expressing a "tadassatthi". 
(See the affix underlined.) 

sumedha-good intellect. yassa atthi. tasmim va vijjatT ti. 

* sumedhaso-the one who has good intellect. 

[wa] sumedhaso=sumedha-+so+si 


३६५, ३९९. तपादितो सी 

365, 399. Tapa’ dito sī. [Tapa-aditotsi. 2 words] 

[V] Tapa'dito sipaccayo hoti “ta’dassa’tthi” icce'tasmim 
atthe. 
To express a "ta'dassatthi", a quality being possessed, the 
affix "sr" is added after the words “tapa (austerity practice)" 


etc. [One "s" is augmented to the affix and it becomes "ssi"] 


533 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


(1) tapo-austerity. yassa atthi tasmim va vijjatī ti. * tapassi- 
the one having austerity practices, an ascetic, a hermit. 
[wa] tapassi-tapa- ssi*si 
Evam 
(2) ° yasassi-the one who has fame, famous. 
[wa] yasassr-yasa-*st-si 
(3) * tejassI-the one who has power, powerful. 
[wa] tejassi=tejatsi+si 


३६६, ४००. दण्डादितो इकई 

366, 400 Danda'dito ika,1. [Danda-adito+ika, 1. 2 words] 

[V] Danda'dito ika,1-icce’ te paccaya honti “ta’dassa’tthi” 
icce’tasmim atthe. 


To express a “tadassatthi’, a quality being possessed by 
someone or in something, the affixes “ika, T’ are added 
after nouns “danda (stick)” etc. 


(1) dando-stick. yassa atthi. tasmirh va vijjatT ti. ° dandiko, 
* dandi-the one having stick. 
[wa] dandiko=danda+ikatsi [wa] dandir-danda-1*si 
Evam 
(2) ° maliko, ° mali-the one having flower, a florist. 
[wa] maliko=malatikatsi [wa] mali=malat+i+si 


३६७, ४०१. मध्वादितो रो 

367, 401. Madhva'dito ro. [Madhu-adito+ro. 2 words] 

[V] Madhu-icce’va’madito rapaccayo hoti “ta’dassa’tthi” ic- 
ce'tasmim atthe. 
To express a *tadassatthi", a quality being possessed, an 


affix “ra” is added after the words “madhu (of sweet taste)" 
etc. (See the affix *r" shown in bold, underlined) 


(1) madhu-sweet taste. yassa atthi, tasmim va vijjati' ti. 
* madhuro-something having sweet taste, sweet. 
[wa] madhuro-madhu-ra-*si 


534 


Taddhita Kappa 


Evam 

(2) * kufijaro-the one having jaws, i.e. elephant. [kufija-jaw] 
[wa] kuñjaro=kuñja+ra+si 

(3) * muggaro-the one having bean. [mugga-bean] 
[wa] muggaro=muggatratsi 

(4) * mukharo-the one having bad-mouth, rude. [mukha-mouth] 
[wa] mukharo-mukha-ra-*si 

(5) * susiro-something having hollow. [susi-hollow] 
[wa] susiro-susi-ra-*si 

(6) ° sisaro-the one having head. [sisa-head] 
[wa] sisaro=sisatratsi 

(7) * sukaro-the one having arrow. [suka-arrow, a dubious word] 
[wa] sukaro=sukatratsi 

(8) ° sunkaro-the one having revenue, a king. [suhka-revenue] 
[wa] sunkaro=sunka+rat+si 

(9) * subharo-the one having beauty. [subha-beauty] 
[wa] subharo=subha+ra+si 

(10) * suciro-the one having purity, pure. [suci-purity] 
[wa] suciro=sucit+ra+si 

(11) * ruciro-the one having light. [ruci-light, shine, beauty] 
[wa] ruciro=rucitratsi 


























३६८, ४०२. गुणादितो वन्तु 

368, 402. Guna'dito vantu. [Guna-àdito--vantu. 2 words] 

[V] Guna-icce'va'ma' dito vantu-paccayo hoti “ta’dassa’tthi” 
icce’tasmim atthe. 


To express a “tadassatthi’, a quality being possessed by 
someone or in something, the affix *vantu" is added after 
the words “guna (virtue or dignity)" etc 

Note: Due to necessary morphological procedure, only “va” will be left 
in the affix which is shown underlined. See Sutta 124 for clarification. 


(1) guno-virtue or dignity. yassa atthi, tasmim va vijjati’ti. 
* gunava-virtuous or a dignitary. [guna-virtue] 
[wa] gunava=guna+vantutsi 


535 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


Evam 

(2) * yasava-the one having fame, the famous. [yasa-fame] 
[wa] yasava=yasa+vantutsi 

(3) * dhanava-the one having wealth, the wealthy. [dhana-wealth] 
[wa] dhanava=dhana-+vantu+tsi 

(4) ° pafifiava-the one having wisdom, the wise. [paíifia-wisdom] 
[wa] pafifiava- panna +vantutsi 

(5) * balava-the one having power, the powerful. [bala-power] 
[wa] balava=balat+vantu+si 

(6) * bhagava-the one having auspiciousness, the glorious. 
[bhaga-auspiciousness, glory] 
[wa] bhagava-bhaga-vantu-si 


३६९, ४०३. सत्यादीहि मन्तु 

369, 403. Satya'dihi mantu. [Sati-adihi+mantu. 2 words] 

[V] Sati-iccevamadihi mantu-paccayo hoti “ta’dassa’tthi” 
icce’tasmim atthe. 


To signify “tadassatthi’, a quality being possessed by 
someone or in something, the affix *mantu" is added after 
the words “sati (mindfulness or memory)” etc. 

Note: Due to necessary morphological procedure, only “ma” will be 
visible in the affix which is shown underlined. Also see Sutta 124. 


(1) sati-mindfulness. yassa atthi, tasmim va vijjati’ti. ® satima- 
the one having mindfulness, mindful. 
[wa] satima-sati--mantu-si 

Evam 

(2) * jutimà-the one having light, the bright. 
[wa] jutima=jutit+mantutsi 

(3) ° rucima-the one having light, the illustrious. 
[wa] rucima=ruci+mantu+tsi 

(4) ° thutima-the one having praise, the praised. 
[wa] thutima-thuti--mantu-si 

(5) * dhitimà-the one having wisdom or integrity, the wise. 
[wa] dhitima-dhiti--mantu-si 














536 


Taddhita Kappa 


(6) ° matima-the one having intellect, intelligent. 
[wa] matima=mati+mantutsi 

(7) * bhanuma-the one having shine, i.e. the sun. 
[wa] bhanuma=bhanu+mantu+si 


३७०, ४०५. सद्धादितो ण 

370, 405. Saddha’dito na. [saddha-adito*na. 2 words] 

[V] Saddha-icce'va' madito napaccayo hoti “ta’dassa’tthi” 
icce’tasmim atthe. 


When expressing “tadassatthi’, a quality being possessed 
by someone, the affix “na” is added after the words *sad- 
dha (faith)" etc. [This affix is invisible] 


(1) saddha-faith. yassa atthi, tasmim va vijjati’ti ० saddho-the 
one having faith, the faithful. [wa] saddho=saddha+natsi 
Evam 
(2) * pafifio-the one having wisdom, the wise. 
[wa] pafifio-pafifia--na-si 
(3) * amaccharo-the one having non-stinginess, the generous. 
[wa] amaccharo-amacchara-*na-si 
Note: “a” in the last example is a morpheme of negative particle “na” 


which means “without, not". [na-without+macchara-stinginess. See 
Sutta 333 to understand the procedure of changing “na” into *a"] 





३७१, ४०४. आयुस्सुकारास मन्तुम्हि 
371, 404. Ayussu’kara’sa mantumhi. 
- [Ayussat+u-karot+asat+mantumhi. 4 words] 
[V] Ayussa anto ukaro asa'deso hoti mantumhi paccaye pare. 


The component vowel “u” of the word *ayu (life)" changes 
into “asa” when the affix “mantu” is affixed after it. 


ayu-life. assa atthi, tasmim va vijjatiti * ayasmà-the one having 
life, [wa] ayasma-ayu-mantu-si 


Note: This term *ayasma" is a very polite form of address used among 
monastics which means “the one having a long life-span". 


537 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


Ta’ ppakati Taddhita 
(Nouns in affix expressing “made up of something") 


३७२, ३८५. तप्पकतिवचने मयो 

372, 385. Ta’ppakativacane mayo. 
[Tappakativacanetmayo. 2 words] 

[V] Tappakativacana’ tthe mayapaccayo hoti. 


To express *tappakati", “by means of which something is 
made up of, or crafted with", an affix “maya” is added after 


the noun to denote it. See the affix shown underlined. 
[ta-by that-pakati-done, made of, crafted with] 


(1) suvannena-with gold. pakatarh-made, crafted. kammarh-deed 
or craft, i.e. the craft made with gold or made up of gold. 
e sovannamayam made of gold. 
[wa] sovannamayam-suvanna-*maya-si 
Evam 
(2) * rüpityamayam-made of silver. 
[wa] rüpiyamayam-rüpiya*maya-si 
(3) * jatumayarh-made of lac. 
[wa] jatumayam-jatu--maya-si 
(4) * rajatamayarh-made of silver. 
[wa] rajatamayam-rajata--maya-si 
(5) ° itthakamayarh-made of brick. 
[wa] itthakamayam-itthaka--maya-si 
(6) * ayomayam made of iron, 
[wa] ayomayarh=ayatmayatsi 
(7) * mattikamayam-made of clay or mud. 
[wa] mattikamayam-mattika--maya-si 
(8) * darumayam-made of wood. 
[wa] darumayam-daru-maya-si 
(9) ° gomayarh-originated from cow, i.e. cow-dung. 
[wa] gomayam-go--maya-si 


538 


Taddhita Kappa 


Sankhya Taddhita 
(Numerical Nouns in Taddhita-affix) 
Note: Suttas 373, 374, 375, 376, 377, 378, 379, 380, 381, 382, 383, 384, 385, 
386, 387, 388, 389, 390, 391, 392, 393, 394, 395, these twenty-three Suttas 
deal with numerical nouns. Of these, five Suttas 373, 375, 384, 385, 392, 
apply various affixes. 


Of various numerical nouns: 

(a) The cardinal numbers from “one to ten" are independent numerical 
nouns. 

(b) Upward numerical nouns such as visa (twenty) to navuti (ninety) and 
mixed-value numerical nouns, which are made up of numerical nouns 
of lesser and higher value, such as from eleven to nineteen, ninety-one 
to ninety-nine, are mostly Samasa (compound) nouns. 

(c) Other numerical nouns of higher to the highest value, starting from sata 
(hundred) to koti (crore) to asankhyeya (infinity, aeon) are nouns with 
numerical values of progressive multiplication which have specific 
gender and numbers. 


३७३, ४०६. सक्क्यापूरणे मो 
373, 406. Sankhyapürane mo. [Sankhyaptrane+mo. 2 words] 
[V] Sankhyapürana' tthe ma-paccayo hoti. 


To express "full completeness of the value" in the ordinal 


numbers, an affix “ma” is added after the numerical nouns. 
[See the affix “ma” shown in bold, underlined. Note that “0” is deriva- 
tive morpheme of nominative singular “si” applied after the word.] 


(1) paficannarh-of five. pürano-fullness. ® paficamo-the fullness 
of five, the fifth. [Chattht Tappurisa] 
[wa] paficamo=paficat+matsi 
Evam 
(2) * sattamo-fullness of seven, the seventh 
[wa] sattamo=satta+matsi 
(3) * atthamo-fullness of eight, the eighth 
[wa] atthamo-attha--ma-si 
(4) * navamo-fullness of nine, the ninth. 
[wa] navamo-nava-*ma-si 


539 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


(5) * dasamo-fullness of ten, the tenth. 
[wa] dasamo=dasat+matsi [All are Chatthi Tappurisa] 


३७४, ४०८. स छस्स वा 
374, 408. Sa chassa và. [Sa+chassa+va. 3 words] 
[V] Chassa sakaradeso hoti và sathkhyapurana’tthe. 


The numerical word “cha-six” sometimes changes into “sa” 
in the order of ordinal numbers. [See “sa” shown underlined] 


(1) channam-of six. pürano * sattho-fullness of six, the sixth. 
[Chatthi Tappurisa] 
[wa] sattho-cha-ttha-*si 
(2) * chattho-fullness of six, the sixth. va-also. 
(This one is inapplicable example) 
[wa] chattho=cha+ttha+si 
Note: “chattho va” means that there are two forms of usage for this 
numerical word, one with “sa” and one with its original “cha” where 
the function of Sutta 1s not applied. 


३७५, ४१२. एकादितो दसस्सी 
375, 412. Eka’dito dasassr'. [Eka-adito+dasassa+i. 3 words] 
[V] Eka'dito dasassa ante I-paccayo hoti và sankhyapüranatthe. 


८८८११ 


When signifying fullness of numerical value, an affix “T” is 
added after the word “dasa (ten)” (which is positioned after 
“eka (one)" etc. 

Note: This affix also signifies feminine gender. See the affix “T” 
shown in bold, underlined in the examples. 


(1) eko ca-one also, dasa ca-ten also, ekadasa-one and ten or one 
plus ten, the eleven. [Dvanda. This is minor ED which combines 
“eka” and *dasa"] 
ekadasannath-of one and ten. pūraņī-is fullness. ० ekadast- 
fullness of one and ten, i.e. the eleventh. [Chatthi Tappurisa, final 
complete ED] 

[wa] ekadasi=ekadasati+si 

(2) pafica ca-five also, dasa ca paficadasa-five and ten, the fifteen. 

[Dvanda]. paficadasannarh-of five and ten. purani-is fullness. 


540 


Taddhita Kappa 


$ paficadasi-fullness of five and ten, the fifteenth. [Chatthi Tap- 
purisa] 
[wa] paficadasr-paficadasa-1-si 
(3) cattaro ca-four also, dasa ca catuddasa-four and ten. [Dvanda] 
catuddasannarh-of four and ten. pürani-is fullness. 
e cātuddasī- fullness of four and ten, i.e. the fourteenth. [Chatthi 
Tappurisa] 
[wa] catuddasi=catudasati+si (one "d" augmented) 
Pürane'ti kimattham? 
What is the word *purana" for? 
To show that numerical nouns shown below are not a “pu- 
rana-signifying the fullness”, so, inapplicable. 
(No need to affix with “T’ affix) 
* ekadasa-one and ten, eleven. * paficadasa-five and ten, the fif- 
teen. [Dvanda compounds] 


३७६, २५७. दसे सो निच्चञ्च 
376, 257. Dase so niccan’ca. [Daset+sotniccam+ca. 4 words] 
[V] Dasasadde pare niccam chassa so hoti. 

When the word “dasa” follows (in a numerical compound 


noun), the front word “cha (six)" always changes into “so”. 
[‘so” shown underlined] 


* solasa-six and ten, sixteen. [Dvanda] 


३७७, ०. aed निग्गहितञ्च 
377. ...Ante niggahitan’ca. [Ante+niggahitarh+ca. 3 words] 
[V] Tàsam sankhyanam ante niggahita’ gamo hoti. 
At the ends of numerical compounds (such as paficadasa- 
fifteen, catuddasa-fourteen), there comes a “niggahita-th”’. 


[This Sutta enjoins to insert an “th” after certain numerical nouns. 
See the added “mh” in the examples shown in bold, underlined] 


(1) * paficadasimr-on the fifteenth day or for fifteen days. 
(2) * catuddasirh-on the fourteenth day or for fourteen days. 


541 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


Note: An accusative singular “arn” in the sense of accanta-samyoga or 
Locative can also be applied to complete this word properly if the func- 
tion of this Sutta is not applied. 


३७८, ४१४. fd च 
378, 414. Ti ca. [Ti+ca. 2 words] 
[V] Tàsam sankhyanam ante tikara'gamo hoti. 


(In numerical nouns like visa and timsa), there is a “ti” af- 


fix to be added after them. 
[See “ti” in the examples shown in bold, underlined.] 


(1) * visati-twenty. 
(2) * timsati-thirty. [Dvanda compound] 


Note: Note that the “ti-affixed numerical nouns" are usually 
of feminine gender, singular. 


३७९, २५८. छ दरानं 
379, 258. La da,ranam. [La+da, ranarh. 2 words] 
[V] Dakara,rakaranam sankhyanam lakara’deso hoti. 


The consonants “d” and “r” of numerical nouns changes 
into “I or I”. [i.e. it is substituted with “J-P”, shown in bold] 


Explanation: In the numerical words “chadasa (sixteen) and cattarisa 
(forty)", the consonants “d” of chadasa and “r” of cattarisa changes 
into “I” in the morphological process of those words. See “I and I" 
shown in bold in the examples. In the grammatical parlance, both “I and 
I" are not different except in the shape of writing as they are inter- 
changeable. 

[Reference text] Lalana' maviseso (Sandhi, Sutta 34, Rüpasiddhi text) 


(1) * solasa-sixteen. 
(2) * cattalisam-forty. [Dvanda compound] 


542 


Taddhita Kappa 


३८०, २५५. वीसतिदसेसु बा द्विस्स तु 

380, 255. Visati,dasesu bà dvissa tu. 
[Visati, dasesut+ba+dvissattu. 4 words] 

[V] Visati,dasa,icce’tesu dvissa ba hoti. 


The numerical word “dvi” changes into “ba” (where visa or 
dasa are after it in a numerical compound). 


[See the applied-function “ba” shown in bold, underlined. This “ba” is 
similar to the English prefix “by, bi"] 


(1) * bavisati’ndriyani-twenty-two faculties. [bavisati+indriyani] 
[Dvigu] 
(2) ° barasa-twelve. manussa-men. [Dvanda] 


Tuggahanena dvissa du,di,do-adesa ca honti. 


By virtue of the word “tu” in Sutta, the numerical word 


“dvi” also changes into “du, di, do". [See the applied func- 
tions shown in bold, underlined.] 


[Du-function] ° durattam-two nights. [Dvigu] 

[Di-function] * dirattam-two nights. 

* digunam-two layered or two times. [Dvigu] 

[Do-function] ° dohalint-a pregnant woman having a craving 
(which used to occur during pregnancy). [Ta'dassa'tthi Taddhita] 


३८१, २५४. एकादितो दस्स र सङ्घ्याने 

381, 254. Eka'dito dassa ra sankhyane. 
[Eka-adito+dassatrat+sankhyane. 4 words] 

[V] Eka'dito dasassa dakarassa rakaro hoti va sankhyane. 


In the numerical compound noun “ekadasa (eleven) etc.,” the 
consonant “d” of the word “dasa” located after “eka” etc, 


sometimes changes into an “r”. [The changed “r” is shown in 
bold, underlined. The second is inapplicable example] 


(1) * ekarasa, * ekadasa-eleven. (Both are of the same meaning) 
(2) * barasa, * dvadasa-twelve. [Dvanda] 

Sankhyane'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “sankhyane” for? 


543 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


To show that the example below is inapplicable as it does 
not signify a numerical noun, but only a numerical qualifi- 
er (an adjective). 

* dvadasa’ yatanani-twelve bases. [Dvadasadayatanani] 


३८२, २५९. अट्ठादितो च 

382,259. Attha'dito ca. [Attha-dditot+ca. 2 words] 

[V] Attha-icce'va' madito ca dasasaddassa dakarassa 
rakara'deso hoti va sankhyane. 


In the numerical nouns “Atthadasa (eighteen) etc.", the con- 
sonant “d” of numerical word “dasa” placed after "attha", 


665,99 


sometimes changes into an “r”. [The changed “r” is shown in 
bold, underlined. | 


* attharasa-eight and ten, the eighteen. 

* atthadasa-eighteen. [Second is inapplicable example] [Dvanda] 

Atthadito'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “atthadito” for? 

To show that the examples below are inapplicable as they 

are not in *atthadi-the 18s group". 

* paficadasa-fifteen. * solasa-sixteen [Dvanda compound]. 

Sankhyane'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “sankhyane” for? 

To show that the example shown below is inapplicable as it 

is not a numerical noun, but a numeral adjective. 

* atthadasiko-something of eighteen parts. [Ta'dass'atthi Taddhita] 
[wa] atthadasiko=atthadasatikatsi 


544 


Taddhita Kappa 


३८३, २५३. द्वेकट्ठान माकारो वा 
383, 253. Dve'ka'tthana' makaro va. 
[Dvi, eka, atthanarn+akaro+va. 3 words] 
[V] Dvi,eka,attha-icce'tesa' manto akaro hoti và sankhyane. 


The last component vowels “i, a” of the numerical words 

dvi, eka, attha, change into “a” sometimes. (It all becomes 

dva, eka, attha. See the applied functions shown in bold). 

* dvadasa-twelve. * ekadasa-eleven. * attharasa-eighteen. 

[Dvanda compounds] 

Sankhyane'ti kimattham? 

What is the word *sankhyane" for? 

To show that the examples shown are inapplicable as they 

are not numerical nouns, but numeral adjectives of the “Ba- 

hubbihi compound nouns". 

* dvidanto-someone having two teeth. [dvi-two+danta-teethto] 

* ekadanto-someone having one tooth. [eka-one+danta+o] 

* eka'cchanno-the building having one roof. 
[eka-one+channa-roofed, covered+o, one "c" augmented] 

* atthatthambho-the building having eight pillars. 


[attha-eight--thamba-pillar*o, "t" augmented] [All are Bahubbthi 
Compounds] 


३८४, ४०७. चतुच्छेहि थठा 
384, 407. Catu,cchehi tha,tha. 
[Catu, cchehi+tha, tha. 2 words] 
[V] Catu,cha-icce’tehi tha,tha-icce’te paccaya honti 
sankhyaptrana’ tthe. 
When expressing ordinal numbers, the affixes “tha, tha” 
should be added after numerical words catu (four), cha (six) 
respectively. [See the affixes shown in bold.] 
(1) * catuttho-the fourth. 
[wa] catuttho=catu+tha+tsi (one dissimilar “t” augmented) 
(2) * chattho-the sixth. [Chatthi Tappurisa] 
[wa] chattho-cha-tha-si (one dissimilar “१? augmented) 


545 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


३८५, ४०९. द्वितीहि तियो 
385, 409. Dvi, tihi 0१०. [Dvi, tihi+tiyo. 2 words] 
[V] Dvi ti-icce’tehi tiyapaccayo hoti sankhyapüurana'tthe. 


When expressing ordinal numbers, the affix “tiya” is added 
after numerical nouns dvi (two) and ti (three) respectively. 
[See the applied affix in bold, underlined. ] 
e dutiyo-the second. (See next Sutta for “du” function) 
[wa] dutiyo=dvi+tiyatsi 
* tatiyo-the third. [Chatthi Tappurisa] (See next Sutta for “ta” func- 
tion) [wa] tatiyo=ti+tiyatsi 


३८६, ४१०. तिये दुतापि च 

386, 410. Tiye du,ta’pi Ca. [Tiye+du,tat+apit+ca. 4 words] 

[V] Dvi,ti,icce’tesarh du,ta-icce’te adesa honti tiyapaccaye pa- 
re. 


Dvi changes into “du” and ti changes into “ta” when the 
affix “tiya” is added after them. [See the applied function dis- 
played in bold.] 


* dutiyo. * tatiyo. (Refer to 385) 
Apiggahanena afifiesu’pi dvi-iccetassa du-adeso hoti. 


By means of the word “api” in Sutta, The numerical word 

“dvi” also changes into “du” in other instances of words. 

[See the applied function displayed in bold.] 

e durattam-two night. [Compare the function prescribed by “tu” in 
Sutta 380] [Dvigu] 


Caggahanena dvi-icce'tassa dikaro hoti. 


By means of the word “ca” in Sutta, the numerical word 

"dvi" also changes into “पा”, 

* dirattam-two night. 

e digunam-two-layered. sanghatim-cover robe. parupetva-having 
clothed. i.e. having covered with two-layered robe. [Compare the 


function prescribed by “tu” in Sutta 380. This seems like a redundant 
function] 


546 


Taddhita Kappa 


३८७, ४११. तेस महूपपदेन अडडूडदिवड्टदियइड़्तिया 
387, 411. Tesa^maddh'üpapadena addhuddha, di- 
vaddha, diyaddha'ddhatiya. 
[Tesarnt+addha-upapadena+addhuddha, divaddha, diyaddha, 
addhatiya. 3 words] 
[V] Tesam catuttha,dutiya,tatiyanam addh'üpapadanam 
addhuddha,divaddha,diyaddha,addhatiya’desa honti, 
addhü'papadena saha nippajjante. 


Those numerical words catuttha (fourth), dutiya (second), 
tatiya (third) which has a penultimate word addha (half) be- 
fore them, respectively change into addhuddha, divaddha, 
diyaddhha, addhatiya, along with the word *addha". 
[Function is quite simple and easy to understand] 
The Order of Functions 

addha-catuttha (half & fourth) >addhuddha. 
addha-dutiya (half & second) >divaddha, diyaddha. [Two functions] 
addha-tatiya (half & third) >addhatiya. 
(1) addhena-together with half. catuttho-the four or fourth. 

* addhuddho-(is called) four and half. 
(2) addhena-together with half. dutiyo-the two or second. 

* divaddho-(is called) two and half. 
(3) addhena-together with half. dutiyo-the two or second. 

° diyaddho-(is called) two and half. 
(4) addhena-together with half. tatiyo- the three or third. 


* addhatiyo-(is called) three and half. 
[All examples are Tatiya Tappurisa compounds]. 


३८८, ६८. सरूपान मेकसेस्वसकिं 
388, 68. Sarüpana' mekasesva'sakim. 
[Sarüpanam-ekaseso-asakim. 3 words] 

[V] Sarüpanam pada,byafijananam ekaseso hoti asakim. 
When repeatedly expressing multiple words of the same 
shape and meaning, a procedure called *ekasesa" is to be 
performed, making all those words into one and retaining 
only one word. [eka-one+sesa-left, to remain, to retain] 


547 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


puriso ca-man also. puriso ca-man also. * purisa-men [Dvanda]. 
Note: Here, two of the same word “Purisa” are made into one by 
“ekasesa” procedure of this Sutta, making all those words of similar 
form into one. 

Sarüpana'miti kimattham? 

What is the word “‘sarupanarh” for? To show that the exam- 
ple words of dvanda compound nouns shown below are 
words of dissimilar forms and meanings, not “sartipa-words 
of similar forms and meanings". Hence, they are inapplica- 
ble here. [sarüpa-words of similar forms and meaning] 

hattht ca-elephant also. asso ca-horse also. ratho ca-chariot also. 
pattiko ca-infantry man also.* hatthi, assa, ratha, pattika-the el- 
ephant, horse, chariot and infantry man. [Dvanda compound] 
Asakin’ti kimattham? [asakirn+iti+kimattharh] 

What is the word “asakith” for? 

To show that the example below is meant for only one time, 
not “asakim-many times”. So, it is inapplicable. 

* puriso-man. 


548 


Taddhita Kappa 


३८९, ४१३. गणने दसस्स द्वितिचतुपञ्चछसत्तअइनवकानं वीतिचत्तार 

पञ्ञाछसत्तासनवा योसु योनञ्चीसमासंठिरितीतुति 

389, 413. Ganane dasassa 

dvi,ti,catu,pafica,cha,satta, attha, 
navakanarh vi,ti,cattara,pafifia,cha, 
satta’sa,nava yosu. 

Yonaf'cr'sa?! masam,thi,ri,C tu’ ti. 
[Ganane+dasassa+dvi, ti, catu, pafica, cha, satta, attha, 
navakanam-vi, ti, cattara, वीचे, cha, satta, asa, navat+yosu+ 
yonam+tcatisarh, asarh, thi, ri, ti, 1ti, uti. 8 words] 

[V] Ganane dasassa dvika,tika,catukka,paficaka,chakka, 
sattaka,atthaka,navakanam sarüpanam kate'kasesanam 
yathasankhyam vi,ti,cattara,paüfia,cha,satta,asa,nava- 
icca’desa honti asakim yosu. Yonafi'ca Isam,asam,thi,ri,ti, 
Iti,uti-icca’desa honti. Paccha puna nippajjante. 


In numerical nouns, the numerical word “dasa”, with “yo” 
vibhattis duly applied after it, also having made it into an 
“ekasesa” after being multiplied by times dvika (two), tika 
(three), catukka (four), paficaka (five), chakka (six), sattaka 
(seven), atthaka (eight), navaka (nine), changes into “vi, ti, 
cattara, panna, cha, satta, asa, nava” respectively. All the 
applied “yo” vibhattis after them also change into “Isam, 
asam, thi, ri, ti, Iti, uti" respectively. 





Explanation 
(on the morphological procedure as prescribed in the Sutta) 


When a dasa (a numerical value in ten) is multiplied by times in a Dvanda: 
dvika (two), tika (three), catukka (four), paficaka (five), chakka (six), 
sattaka (seven), atthaka (eight), navaka (nine), all the resultant times of the 
same dasa in the dvanda compound process has to be made into “ekasesa”, 
thereby having only one “dasa” left, but the resultant numerical value of each 
multiplication is to remain accordingly unchanged. Afterwards, it will look 
like this: 

(1) dasa [multiplied x in two times=twenty] 

(2) dasa [multiplied x in three times-thirty] 


(3) dasa [multiplied x in four times=forty] 
549 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


(4) dasa [multiplied x in five times=fifty] 

(5) dasa [multiplied x in six times-sixty] 

(6) dasa [multiplied x in seven times-seventy] 

(7) dasa [multiplied x in eight times-eighty] 

(8) dasa [multiplied x in nine times-ninety] 

Now, next stage of morphological procedure is like this: 


LE. 


Here, pathama “yo” vibhatti (nominative plural) is to be applied after each 
dasa. So, there will be a “yo” after each of eight “dasa”. 
Example: (1) dasatyo.....(8) dasatyo 


By injunction of this Sutta, each of eight “dasa” are to be re- 
spectively changed into vi, ti, cattara, panna, cha, satta, asa, 
nava respectively. Then it will look like this: 


(1) vr*yo, (2) tityo, (3) cattaratyo, (4) pafifiatyo, (5) chatyo, 
(6) (a) Sattatyo, (b) sattat+yo, (7) asatyo, (8) navatyo. 


Then, all the applied “yo” after each of eight “dasa” are to be 

changed into 1sar (for three initial words), asarm, thi, ri, ti, Iti, uti 

respectively. Now, here is what it will look like: (when all preced- 

ing morphological procedures are done) 

(1) vr-isari (elide 1 after v and then, join v to 1) Visam=20 

(2) titisam (“i” of “ti” is elided. A niggahita m has to be inserted after ti, 
“T” is shortened) timsam=30 

(3) cattara-isam (elide a behind r and change “r” into “I” by 379, join 1 
to 1) cattalisam=40 [^1sam" function for examples 1,2,3] 

(4) panifia+asarh (elide à after ñ and join ñ to next a) pafifiasam-—50 

(5) cha+thi (change “cha” into “sa”. Reduplicate with one t) satthi=60 

(6) (a) satta--ri-(no further action needed) sattari=70 


(b) satta+ti=(no further action needed) sattati=70 
[2 examples for the 70] 


(7) aSatiti=(delete a after s and join s to next 1) asIti=80 
(8) nava-uti-(elide a after v and then join v to next u) navuti=90 
Now, let's see the examples of Sutta as finished words: 
e visam-Twenty. ® timsam-Thirty. * cattallsarh-Forty. 
e pafifiasam-Fifty. ® satthi-Sixty. ® sattari-Seventy. ० sattati- 
Seventy. * asiti-Eighty. * navuti-Ninety. 


550 


Taddhita Kappa 


[All these words are Dvanda compound nouns] 


Asakin'ti kimattham? 

What is the word *asakim" for? 

To show that the example below is meant for only one time, 
not *asakim-many times". So, it is inapplicable. 

[This word *asakim" is to be found in the vutti of Sutta] 

* dasa-ten. 

Ganane'ti kimattham? 

What is the word *ganane" for? 

To show that the example below is meant for the statement 
of a fact, not for numerical counting. So, it is inapplicable. 
* dasadasaka-ten multiplied by ten. purisa-men (a hundred men). 


३९०, २५६. चतूपपदस्स लोपो तुत्तरपदादिचस्स चु चोपि नवा 
390, 256. Catu’papadassa lopo tu’ttarapada’dicassa 
cuco’pi nava. 
[Catu-upapadassa+lopo+tututtarapada-adicassatcu, co+api+ 
nava. 7 words] 
[V] Cati’papadassa ganane pariyapannassa tukarassa lopo hoti. 
Uttarapada'dicakarassa cu,co’pi adesa honti nava. 


Of the numerical word “catu (four), “tu” has to be deleted 
and the initial “ca” thereof also changes into “cu, co". [See 

the applied function which is shown in bold, underlined. Only the first 
two examples are applicable. The third is inapplicable.] 

(1) * cuddasa, 

(2) * coddasa. 


(3) *catuddasa-fourteen. 
[One “d” is augmented in example words, all Dvanda compounds] 


Apiggahanena anu’papadassa’pi pada’ dicakarassa lopo hoti 
nava. cassa cu,co’pi honti. 

By means of the word “api” in Sutta, the initial word “ca” 
which has no penultima, is occasionally elided while in 


some words, that initial “ca” changes into “cu or co". [See 
the applied function in bold, underlined] 


55] 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


(1) ° talisarh (The initial ca is elided in this example). 

(2) * cattalisarh (ca is not elided in this example) 

(3) * cuttalisam (“cu” function). 

(4) * cottalisam-Forty. “co” function. All have the same meaning. 
All examples are Dvanda compounds without any penultima) 


३९१, ४२३. यदनुपपन्ना निपातना सिज्झन्ति 

391, 423. Ya’danu’papanna nipatana sijjhanti. 
[Yamtana-upapanna-+nipatana+sijjhanti. 4 words] 

[V] Ye sadda a’nidditthalakkhana 

[1] akkhara,pada,byafijanato, 

[2] itthi,puma,napumsakalingato, 

[3] nàmu'pasagga,nipatato, 

[4] abyayibhava samasa,taddhita" khyatato, 

[5] ganana,sankhya,kala,karaka’ppayoga safinato, 

[6] sandhi,pakati,vuddhi,lopa’ gama, vikara, viparitato, 

[7] vibhattivibhajanato ca, 
te nipatana sijjhanti. 

Any Pali word, structural characteristic of which are as yet 

morphologically unexplained herein: 

[1] by mode of letter, completed word form and consonant, 

[2] by means of feminine, masculine and neuter genders, 

[3] by Noun, Upasagga, Nipata, 

[4] by means of Samasa nouns such as Abyayibhava etc. 
Taddhita noun and Akhyata verbs, 

[5] by numerical terms, time, Karaka (parts of sentences in 
any specific case-endings) and example words and 
grammatical terms, 

[6] Sandhi (euphonic combination), Pakati (keeping a word 
as it is. i.e. holding off any morphological procedure), 
vuddhi, Lopa-elision, insertion, vikara and viparita 
procedures, 

[7] by analysis of Vibhatti-(Noun case-endings and Verb- 
terminations), can be brought to completion by this Sutta. 


552 


Taddhita Kappa 


३९२, ४१८. द्वादितो को नेकत्ये च 
392,418. Dva’dito ko’neka’tthe ca. 
[Dvi-adito--ko--aneka-atthe-ca. 4 words] 
[V] Dvi-icce'va'madito kapaccayo hoti aneka'tthe ca, nipatana 
sijjhanti. 
There should come a “ka” to be affixed after the numerical 
word “dvi” and so on when expressing a sense of the multi- 
tude. (Those shown with mark ® only are examples. See “k” shown in 
bold, underlined. The “arh” is a vibhatti morpheme of the nominative 
singular “51” for neuter gender nouns) 
(1) satassa-of a hundred. * dvikam-two times. dvisatam-(is 
called) two hundred, 200. [wa] dvikarh=dvitkatsi 
(WA of all the examples are the same except the preceding 
numeral component word such as “ti, catu" etc.) 
(2) satassa-of a hundred. ® tikarh-three times. tisatarh-(is called) 
three hundred, 300. [wa] tikarn=titka+si 
(3) satassa * catukkarh-four times (one “k” augmented). 
catusatam-(is called) four hundred, 400. 
[wa] catukam-catu--ka-*si 
(4) satassa ® paficakarh-five times. paficasatam-(is called) five 
hundred, 500. [wa] paficakarh=paficatka+si 
(5) satassa * chakkari-six times (one “k” augmented). chasatarh- 
(is called) six hundred, 600. [wa] chakkarh=cha+ka+si 
(6) satassa * sattakarn-seven times. sattasatam-(is called) seven 
hundred, 700. [wa] sattakam-satta--ka-si 
(7) satassa ° atthakarh-eight times. atthasatarh-(is called) eight 
hundred, 800. [wa] atthakarh=attha+ka+si 
(8) satassa * navakam-nine times. navasatam-(is called) nine 
hundred, 900. [wa] navakam-nava-ka-*si 
(9) satassa-of a hundred. * dasakarh-ten times. dasasatarh-(is 
called) ten hundred, 1000. sahassam-(is also called) one thou- 
sand. hoti-(the term) is. 
[wa] dasakam=dasatkatsi 














553 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


Note: The same examples are shown in Rüpasiddhi grammar though 
there are some differing views regarding the way the examples are 
shown and explained by some scholars. 


३९३, ४१५. दसदसकं सतं दसकानं सतं सहस्सञ्च योम्हि 
393, 415. Dasadasakam satam dasakanam satam 
sahassafi'ca yomhi. 
[Dasadasakam-satam-*dasakanam-satam-tsahassam-tca- 
yomhi. 7 words] 
[V] Ganane pariyapannassa dasadasakassa satarh hoti, sata- 
dasakassa sahassam hoti, yomhi pare. 


In matters of counting, when a “dasa (ten)" is multiplied by 
ten (dasadasaka means ten times by ten), it becomes “sata 
(a hundred)" and a sata multiplied further by ten becomes a 
“sahassam (one thousand)" with “yo” applied after those nu- 


merical nouns. (“Yo” is applied only after “multiple dasa” before it 
becomes a sata or sahassa. It is to be deleted afterwards.) 


(1) * satam-hundred. (2) * sahassam-thousand. 


Dvika'dinam ta'duttarapadanafi'ca nippajjante 
yathasankhyam. 

By progressive multiplication of dvika (two times) and so on, 
all upward numerical terms can be duly formulated in order 
of value. 


(1) satassa-of a hundred. dvikarh-two times. (ta' didam-that. 
hoti-is) * dvisatam-two hundred. i.e. A hundred by two times is 
called two-hundred. 

Evam-thus in the same way, 

(2) * tisatam-three hundred. 

(3) * catusatam-four hundred. 

(4) * paficasatam-five hundred. 

(5) ° chasatarh-six hundred. 

(6) * sattasatam-seven hundred. 

(7) * atthasatam-eight hundred. 

(8) * navasatam-nine hundred. 


554 


Taddhita Kappa 


(9) * dasasatam-ten hundred. 


(10) * sahassam-thousand. hoti-is. 
(9 & 10 are two terms for a thousand) 


३९४, ४१६. याव तदुत्तरि दसगुणितञ्च 
394, 416. Yava ta'duttari dasagunitan’ca. 


[Yava+tarh-uttarit+dasagunitamtca. 4 words] 


[V] Yàva tasam sankhyanam uttari dasagunitafi’ca katabbarn. 


For numerical words (starting from a hundred and upwards 
to a koti-ten million or one crores), it is to be multiplied by 
ten. 


Tam yatha? For example, 

(1) dasassa-of ten. gananassa-the numerical value. dasagunitarh- 
ten-times multiplication. katva-having done. ° satarh-a hundred. 
hoti-is. i.e. having done multiplication of the numerical value ten 
by ten times, (it) becomes a hundred. 

(2) satassa-of a hundred. dasagunitam katva ° sahassarh-a thou- 
sand. hoti. i.e. having done multiplication of a hundred by ten 
times, (it) becomes a thousand. 

(3) sahassassa-of a thousand. dasagunitam katva 
e dasasahassarm-ten thousand. hoti. i.e. having done multiplica- 
tion of a thousand by ten times, (1t) becomes ten thousand. 

(4) dasasahassassa-of ten thousand. dasagunitarh katva 
° satasahassari-a hundred thousand. hoti. i.e. having done mul- 


tiplication of ten thousand by ten times, (it) becomes a hundred 
thousand. 


(5) satasahassassa-of a hundred thousand. dasagunitam katva 
e dasasatasahassam-ten hundred-thousand. hoti. i.e. having 


done multiplication of a hundred thousand by ten times, (it) be- 
comes ten-hundred thousand, (one million). 


(6) dasasatasahassassa-of ten hundred-thousand. dasagunitarh 
katva ° koti-a crore or ten million. hoti. i.e. having done multi- 


plication of ten-hundred thousand by ten times, (it) becomes a koti 
(a crore, ten million) 


(7) kotisatasahassassa-of a hundred-thousand crores, sata- 
gunitam-a hundred-times multiplication. katva ° pakoti-a pako- 


555 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


ti. hoti. ie. having done multiplication of a hundred thousand koti 
by hundred times, (it) becomes a pakoti. [Here, multiplication is by 
a hundred] 

Evam sesa’pi yojetabba. 

Evarh-thus. sesa’ pi [sesa*api]-the remaining numerical terms also. 

yojetabba-should be engaged or formulated. 


Caggahanam visesana'ttham. 
The word “ca” in Sutta has a purpose for allowing 
*visesana" (any applicable specific mathematical formulation). 


३९५, ४१७. सकनामेहि 

395, 417. Sakanamehi. [Sakanamehi. | word] 

[V] Yàsam pana sankhyanarh anidditthanamadheyyanam sakehi 
sakehi namehi nippajjante. 


Those numerical words whose names are not yet shown, are 
to be completed by their individual names. 


(1) satasahassanarh-of a hundred-thousands. satarh-a hundred. 
* koti-is a koti. A hundred-thousand (multiplied by) times a hun- 
dred is a koti. 

(2) kotisatasahassanam satam * pakoti. A hundred-thousand 
koti, (multiplied by) times a hundred is a pakoti. 

(3) pakotisatasahassanam satam * kotipakoti. A hundred- 
thousand pakoti, (multiplied by) times a hundred is a kotipakoti. 

(4) kotipakotisatasahassanam satam ° nahutarm. A hundred- 
thousand kotipakoti, (multiplied by) times a hundred is a nahuta. 

(5) nahutasatasahassanam satam ° ninnahutam. A hundred- 
thousand nahuta, (multiplied by) times a hundred is a ninnahuta. 

(6) ninnahutasatasahassanam satam ° akkhobhini. 


A hundred-thousand ninnahuta, (multiplied by) times a hundred is 
an akkhobhini. 


Tatha-multiply similarly in that manner (for the following terms): 

e bindu, * abbudam, ° nirabbudam, ° ahaham, ° ababar, 
e atatam, ° sogandhikam, ° uppalam, ° kumudam, 

e padumam, ° pundarikam, ° kathanam, 

° mahakathanam, ° asankhyeyyam. 


556 


Taddhita Kappa 


Note: Each upward numeral terms such as bindu, abbuda and up to 
asankhyeyya (infinity or aeon) are to be multiplied by a hundred times 
progressively. 


३९६, ३६३. तेसं णो लोपं 
396, 363. Tesam no lopar. [Tesarn+noHopari. 3 words] 
[V] Tesam paccayanam no lopa’mapajjate. 


The *n" of all Taddhita affixes containing “p” is to be elid- 
ed. 


gotamassa-of a person named Gotama. apaccam-son. 
* gotamo-Gotama's son. [See Sutta 344] 
Evam 
e vasittho. * venateyyo. ® alasyam. ° arogyam. 
(These examples are shown already). 
Note: “na, nayana, nana, neyya, ni, nika, nava, nera, nya, etc are called 
“n-containing affixes”. After elision procedure, only “a, ayana, ana, 
eyya, i, ika, ava, era, ya, will be left in the examples. 


Abyaya Taddhita 
(Nouns in indeclinable affixes) 

Note: Suttas 397, 398, 399 apply indeclinable affixes. Any word applied with 
one of these affixes becomes indeclinable which has no gender, nor any 
change of word-form through a specific morphological procedure. Although 
some appropriate Vibhattis are applicable depending on the context, they 
have to be elided though without undergoing any form of change. [a- 
not-byaya-change. i.e. changeless] 


३९७, ४२०. विभागे धा च 
397, 420. Vibhage dha ca. [Vibhage+dha+ca. 3 words] 
[V] Vibhaga’tthe ca dha-paccayo hoti. 


To signify distributive expressions, an affix “dha” is added. 
[See the “dha” affix shown underlined in examples. This affix can be 
applied after numerical nouns and also after other common nouns. It is 
an indeclinable affix and has no gender. It serves as a distributive adjec- 
tive or adverb. See the affix shown underlined in the examples] 


557 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


ekena-by one. vibhagena-division of portion.* ekadha-by one por- 
tion, in one kind. [wa] ekadha=eka+dha [*na" Vibhatti is applica- 
ble but to be deleted. All examples are the same] 
Evam 
* dvidha-by two portions, in two kinds. 
e tidha-by three portions, in three kinds. 
* catudha-by four portions, in four kinds. 
* paficadha-by five portions, in five kinds. 
* chadha-by six portions, in six kinds. 
[wa] chadha=cha+dha 
(WA of all examples are the same except the preceding numbers) 
Ce'ti kimattham? 
What is the word “ca” in Sutta for? 
So-paccayo hoti. 


To show that an affix “so” can be applied after other non- 
numerical words. [See the “so” affix shown underlined] 


* suttaso-by means of Sutta. [wa] suttaso=sutta+so 

e byafijanaso-by means of byafijana (consonants). 

[wa] byafijanaso-byafijana-so 

e padaso-by means of pada (word). [wa] padaso=pada+so 

Note: This affix “so” usually means “by means of". It is an indeclinable 
affix which serves as an equivalent of the instrumental case. 


३९८, ४२१. सब्बनामेहि पकारवचने तु था 

398, 421. Sabbanamehi pakaravacane tu tha. 
[Sabbanamehi-*pakaravacane-tu-tha. 4 words] 

[V] Sabbanamehi pakaravacana’tthe thapaccayo hoti. 


After sabbanama nouns, the affix “tha” is added to express 
manner and mode. [pakara-manner+vacana-expression] 

Look at the following EDs of nouns affixed with “tha” "tham" of Sutta 
398-399. All the seven vibhatti (case endings) are shown being applied 
by the great Grammarian. However, it should be noted that the most 
widely used one in the majority of Buddhist text is only instrumental 
case. See the “tha” affix shown underlined in the examples. 


558 


Taddhita Kappa 


(1) so pakaro-that manner. ® tathà-that manner. 
(2) tam pakararh-to that manner. ® tatha-to that manner. 
(3) tena pakarena-by that manner. * tathà-by that manner. 
(4) tassa pakarassa-of that manner. ® tatha-of that manner. 
(5) tasma pakara-from that manner. ® tatha-from that manner. 
(6) tassa pakarassa-of that manner. ® tatha-of that manner. 
(7) tasmim pakare-at, in that manner. ® tathà-in that manner. 
[wa] tatha=ta+tha 
Evam 
e yathà-by which manner. [wa] yatha=ya+tha 
० sabbatha-by all manner, after all. 
[wa] sabbatha-sabba-tha 
e aññathā-by other manner, otherwise, or else. 
[wa] afifiatha=afifiadtha 
e itarathà-by another manner, to speak other way or otherwise. 
[wa] itaratha=itara+tha (All examples are similar in WA) 
Tuggahanam kimattham? 
What is the word “tu” in Sutta for? 
Thatta-paccayo 100. 
By it, an affix “thatta” can also be applied after some 
words. 
so pakaro * tathatta-by that manner. 
Evam 
e yathattà-by which manner. ® sabbathatta-by all manner. 
० afifiathatta-by other manner. ® itarathatta-by other manner. 
[wa] ° itarathatta=itara+thatta (All examples are similar in WA) 


Note: The words in this affix “thatta” are seldom found in majority of 
Pali texts. 


३९९, ४२२. किमिमेहि थं 
399, 422. Ki" mimehi tham. [Kirh, imehi+tharh. 2 words] 
[V] Kim, ima-icce’tehi thampaccayo hoti pakaravacana'tthe. 


The affix *tham" is added after kirn (what) and ima (this) 
sabbanama nouns when expressing manner and mode. 


559 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


[See "tham" affix shown underlined in the examples. Also note seven 
case-endings applied in each ED of the examples] 


Examples of “kim” 

(1) ko pakaro-what manner. ० katharh-what manner, How? 
[wa] katham-kim-tham 

(2) kam pakaram-to what manner. ® katharh-to what manner. 

(3) kena pakarena-by what manner. * katharh-by what manner, 
how? 

(4) kassa pakarassa * katham-of what manner. 

(5) kasma pakara ° katharh-from what manner. 

(6) kassa pakarassa ® katham-of what manner. 

(7) kasmirh pakare ° katharh-in what manner. 


Examples of “ima” 

(1) ayam pakaro-this manner. ® ittharh-this manner. [one dissimilar 
^t" is augmented by Sutta 28]. [wa] ittham-ima-tham 

(2) imam pakararh ° ittham-to this manner. 

(3) imina pakarena-by this manner, ® ittharh-by this manner, in this 
way. 

(4) imassa pakarassa ° ittharh-of this manner. 

(5) imasma pakara * ittharh-from this manner. 

(6) imassa pakarassa ° ittharh-of this manner. 

(7) imasmim pakare + ittharh-in this manner. 


४००, ३६४. वुद्धादिसरस्स वा संयोगन्तस्स सणे च 
400, 364. Vuddha'disarassa va'samyogantassa sane 
ca. 
[Vuddhi+tddisarassat+vata-sarhyoga-antassat+sane+ca. 6 words] 
[V] Adisarassa và asamyogantassa adibyafijanassa va sarassa 
vuddhi hoti sanakarake paccaye pare. 


When an “n-conjoined affix” is present in a Taddhita noun 
without any conjunct word, either the initial vowel or the 
vowel of a certain consonant is to undergo a morphological 
process called *vuddhi". 

[Vowels where vuddhi-function is applied are shown underlined] 


560 


Taddhita Kappa 


e abhidhammiko. ° venateyyo. ° vasittho. * alasyam. 
e arogyam. [These examples already shown] 
Asamyogantasse'ti kimattham"? 
What is the word *asamyogantassa" for? 
To show that examples below are not *asamyogantassa- 
single consonant Taddhita-nouns". Instead, they are Taddhita- 
nouns with conjunct-consonants. So, they are inapplicable. 
(See bold-faced, underlined conjuncts in the example words below) 
* bhaggavo-the son of a person named Bhaggu. 
* manteyyo-the son of a woman named Manti. 

[wa] manteyyo=mantit+neyyatsi 
* kunteyyo-the son of a woman named Kunti. 

[wa] kunteyyo=kunti+neyyatsi 
Note: The WA of most examples are already shown. 


४०१, ३७५. मा यूनमागमो ठाने 
401, 375. Ma "yüna' magamo thane. 
[Ma+ii-narh+agamo+thane. 4 words] 
[V] Lu-icce'tesam adibhütanam ma vuddhi hoti. 
Tesu ca e,o-vuddha’ gamo hoti thane. 


The vuddhi procedure on the initial vowels “i, u" of certain 
Taddhita nouns is debarred. Instead, the vowel “e, o" are to 
come (insert) and be replaced in the place of “i, u” where 
appropriate. [Replacing “i” with “e” can be applied only when it is 
followed by “y”, while replacing “u” with “o” is applicable only when 
followed by a “v”] 


Note: In examples 1, 2, 3, “e” is inserted in the front of “i” and “i” is 
changed into “y”. 

In example 4, “0” is inserted in front of “u” and that “u” is changed in- 
to “v”. The substituted vowels are shown in bold, underlined. In WA, a 
process of applicable expansion called sampasarana (सम्प्रसारण) is 
shown in bold, underlined to clearly understand somewhat complex 
function of this Sutta. 


(1) vyakarana' madhite [vyakaranarh+adhite] vyakaranam- 
grammar. adhite-(he) learns. ० veyyakaraniko-the one who 


561 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


learns grammar, a grammar-student. 
[wa] veyyakaraniko=vi-akaranatnikatsi 

(2) nyaya’madhite [nyayam-adhite] nyayam-the logic. adhite 
* neyyayiko-the one who learns logic called “nyaya”, a logic- 
student. [wa] neyyayiko=ni-ayatnikatsi 

(3) vyavacchassa-of a person named vyavaccha. apaccam-son. 
० veyyavaccho-the son of vyavaccha. 
[wa] veyyavaccho=vi-avacchatnika+si 

(4) dvare-at the door. niyutto-(is) involved. ० dovariko-door- 
keeper, security-man at the door. 
[wa] dovariko=du-aratnikatsi 


४०२. ३७७. आत्तञ्च 
402, 377. Attafi' ca. [Attarhtca.2 words] 
[V] Lu-icce'tesam attafi'ca hoti. ri-kara' gamo ca thane. 


The vowels “i, u^ changes into “a”. The “ri” also comes to 
be inserted in some Taddhita nouns where appropriate. 


66९१9 


Note: (a) The two vowels “i” and “u”, which form part of the basic 
front component of each word are included in the ED of examples. 
Those vowels and the changed “a” are shown in bold, underlined. 
In examples 1 & 2, “i” changes into “a”. The coming of “ri-function” 
is applied and “ri” is inserted after the changed “a” in the first example 
only. (b) In examples 3 & 4, “u” changes into “a”. But the changed 
“a” is shortened in example 4. (All examples shown are Bhava Taddhita) 


(1) isissa-of hermit. bhavo-state. * arisyarh-the state of hermit, the 
hermit-hood. 
[wa] arisyarh=isitnyatsi [^i" of “isi” becomes “a”, “ri” is 
inserted after it in this example] 
(2) inassa-of debt. bhavo-state. * Anyarh-state of debt, being in- 
debted. 
[wa] anyarh=inatnyatsi [“i” of “ina” becomes “A” in this 
example] 
Note: Also “ananyarh” is found in the Pali texts. 
[1. anana-being debt-free+nya, tn. 2. anana=na-without+ina-debt. 
bahubbihi cn] 
(3) usabhassa-of being brave like a strong bull. bhavo ® asabharh- 


562 


Taddhita Kappa 


bravery, fearlessness. 
[wa] asabharn=usabha+natsi [“u” of *usabha" becomes “a” 
in this example] 

(4) ujuno-of being upright, bhavo * ajjavarh-uprightness. 
[wa] ajjavarh=uju+natsi 

Note on morphological procedure of example 4: 

(1) “u” of “uju” becomes “a” in this example» aju. 

(2) One “j” is augmented>ajju. The second “u” changed into 
"av"7ajjav. 

(3) The “a” is shortened later on. Thus, it becomes “ajjava” and 


"si" is applied after it. [ajjav-si] . 
(4) That “si” is again changed into an “am”. [ajjav+am]. 

The word is thus completed after all due procedures are done. 

icce’va’madi yojetabba. 

Yüna'miti kimattham? 
What is the word “yiinarh” for? 
To show that in the example below, there is no “i-u”, which 
is grammatically known as “yu”. So, it is inapplicable. 
Instead, it undergoes only a normal vuddhi procedure. (The 
applied vuddhi-vowel is shown underlined). 
apayesu-in woeful states of apaya. jato-born. 
* apayiko-the one who was born in woeful states, the apaya-born. 
[wa] apayiko=apayatnikatsi 
Thane ’ti kimattham? 
What is the word “thane” for? 
To show that the example shown below is a point of the 
ordinary *vuddhi". So they are inapplicable. Only a normal 
vuddhi procedure occurred. (The applied vuddhi-vowel is shown 
underlined. In the first example “i? becomes “e”. In the other three ex- 
amples, “u” becomes “0”) 


* vematiko-doubt-related, doubtful. 

[wa] vematiko=vimati+nika+si 

* opanayiko--inference-related, accessible, being logical. 
[wa] opanayiko=upanayatnikatsi 

* opamayiko-simile-related, analogous. 

[wa] opamayiko=upama+nika+tsi 


563 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


* opayiko-method-related, methodical. 
[wa] opayiko=upayatnikatsi 


४०३, ३५४. क्वचादिमज्झुत्तरानं दीघरस्सा पच्चयेसु च 
403, 354. Kvaca'di, majjhu'ttaranam digha,rassa 


paccayesu ca. 
[Kvaci+adi, majjha, uttaranarh+digha, rassat+paccayesut+ca. 
5 words] 


[V] Kvaci adi,majjha,uttara-icce’tesarh digha,rassa honti 


paccayesu Ca apaccayesu Ca. 


When paccaya (vibhattis and affixes) or non-paccaya (Upasagga 
and Nipdta particles etc) are present in the words, the process of 
changing into “digha” or “rassa” can sometimes be per- 
formed at the beginning, or in the middle, or at the end of 
the words. 


Adidigho tava-First, (here are examples where) “digha-lengthen- 
ing” process takes place in the beginning: 

[Look at the examples carefully. The long vowels 4 and 1 shown in bold 
and underlined in the beginning of words, are the lengthened vowels.] 


e pakaro-fence. * nIvaro-hindrance. [The word nivaranar is a fre- 
quently found word in the texts]. ° p&sado-mansion. ® pakato-well- 
known. ® patimokkho-monastic discipline. ® patikankho-wanted, 
or surely to happen (two meanings). 
icce’va madi. 

Majjhedigho tava-First, (here are examples where) “digha-lengt- 
hening" process takes place in the middle: 


[The long vowel à shown in bold and underlined in the middle of the 
words is the lengthened vowel.] 


* angamagadhiko-the resident of ahga and magadha regions. 
[wa] angamagadhiko=angamagadhatnikatsi 

e orabbhamagaviko-sheep and game hunter. 

[wa] orabbhamagaviko=urabbha,magavatnikatsi 
icce’va’madi. 
Uttaradigho tava-First, (here are examples where) “digha- 
lengthening” process takes place in the end: 


564 


Taddhita Kappa 


[The long vowels 1 and à shown in bold and underlined in the end of the 
words are the lengthened vowels.] 

e khanti-the practice of patience. paramath-noble. tapo-(is) the 
highest ethics. titikkha-a quality called titikkha. 


a? 


i.e. the practice of patience, a quality called “titikkha” is the noble and 
highest ethic. 

e afijana-so-called. giri-mountain. 

e kotara-which has cave or hollowed trees (sex). vanarh-forest. 

e angull-finger. 

icce'va'madi. 

Adirasso tava—First, (here are examples where) “rassa-shortening” 
process takes place in the beginning: 


[Look at example carefully. The short vowel a shown in bold and un- 
derlined in the beginning of the word is the shortened vowel.] 


e pageva [pat+eva] pageva-early in the morning. 
icce'va'madi. 

Majjhe rasso tava—First, (here are examples where) “rassa- 
shortening" process takes place in the middle: [The short vowel a 


shown in bold and underlined in the middle of the words is the short- 
ened vowel.] 


* sumedhaso-the one who has good intellect. 

* suvannadharehi-by the flows of molten-gold. 

icce’va’madi. 

Uttararasso tava-—First, (here are examples where) “rassa- shorten- 
ing" process takes place in the end: 


[Look at examples carefully. The short vowel i shown in bold, under- 
lined in the end of the words is the shortened vowel.] 


e bhovadi nama-named “bhovadi”. so-that person. hoti-is. 
e yathabhavi-is called *yathabhavi". gunena-by virtue. SO-that 
person. 
icce’va’madi. 
Afifie’pi yathajinavacana’nuparodhena yojetabba. 
Other similar examples should be applied in a way not con- 
travening the prevalent usage of Tipitaka Pali canon. 


Caggahanena apaccayesu ca’ti attharh samucceti. 


565 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


By the word “ca” in Sutta, it also shows that the function of 
Sutta can also be applied in cases of non-paccaya words. 


४०४, ३७०. तेसु वुद्धि लोपागमविकारविपरीतादेसा च 
404, 370. Tesu vuddhi, lopa’gama, vikara,viparita’ 
desa ca. 
[Tesu+vuddhi, lopa, agama, vikara, viparita, adesa+ca. 
3 words] 
[V] Tesu adi,majjhu’ttaresu yathajinavacana’nuparodhena kvaci 
vuddhi hoti. Kvaci lopo hoti. Kvaci agamo hoti. Kvaci 
vikaro hoti. Kvaci viparito hoti. Kvaci adeso hoti. 


At the beginning, or in the middle or in the end of various 
words, the morphological procedures of vuddhi, lopa, 
agama, vikara, viparita and adesa are applicable in a way 
not contravening the usages of the canonical Buddhist texts. 
Note: Some examples and most of the procedures have been already 
shown before in the preceding chapters. See underlined vowels in each 


example shown in bold. It is where the respective procedure takes 
place. 


Vuddhi Procedure 


(1) Changing of “a” into “a”, 
(2) changing of 0.” into “e”, 


(3) changing of *u-ü" into “o” is called “vuddhi-to increase". 


Adivuddhi tava— First, (here are examples where) “vuddhi’” process 

takes place in the beginning: 

* abhidhammiko-the Abhidhamma scholar or student [Here, “a” 
becomes “a’’]. 

e venateyyo-the son of someone named Vinata. [Here, "i" becomes 
*e"] 

icce'va'madi. 

Majjhe vuddhi tava— First, (here are examples where) “vuddhi” 

process takes place in the middle: 

e sukhaseyyam-happily sleeping. [Here, “i” becomes “e”] 

e sukhakari-happiness-creating. danam-charity, i.e. charitable deed 


566 


Taddhita Kappa 


which creates happiness. 
e sukhakari-happiness-creating. stlarh-morality. 
[In these two examples, “a” becomes “a’’]. 
icce’va’madi. 
Uttaravuddhi tàva- First, (here are examples where) “vuddhi” 
process takes place at the end: 
* kalingo-the resident of Kalinga. ० magadhiko-the resident of 
Magadha. 
[In these two examples, the applied vibhatti nominative singular “si” 
becomes “o”. This function is redundant as it was already shown in the 
nouns section] 
e paccakkhadhamma-the one who have witnessed (realized) 
Dhamma. 
[Here, component vowel “a” of the last word “ma” becomes “a”. 
Note: This function is also redundant as “yo” applied after it can be 
changed into “a” by normal procedure as prescribed in the previous sec- 
tions of noun and Samasa. [adi-in the beginning. majje-in the middle, 
uttara-at the last point] 
icce'va'madi. 
Lopa Procedure 
Disappearance of a visible, pre-existing syllable 
by procedure of elision is called “Lopa”. 
Adilopo tava- First, (here are examples where) “lopa-elision” pro- 
cess takes place in the beginning: 
० talisarh-forty. [Here, “ca” before “ta” is elided] 
icce'va'madi. 
Majjhe lopo Tàva- First, (here are examples where) “lopa” pro- 
cess takes place in the middle: 
e kattukamo-the one wanting to do. [Here, “rh” before “ka” is 
elided. If left unelided, it will be *Kattum kimo’’]. 
e kumbhakaraputto-the son of potter. [Here, “th” before “ka” is 
elided. If unelided, it will be “Kumbhar karaputto"]. 
e vedallam-joy-related. [Here, “th” before “II” is elided. If left 
unelided, it will be “vedam Ilarh’”’]. 
icce'va'madi. 
Uttaralopo tàva- First, (here are examples where) “lopa” process 
takes place at the end: 


567 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


* bhikkhu-male-monk 
e bhikkhuni-female-monk. [In these examples, “si” vibhatti applied 
after them is elided. As this procedure was also shown in the Nouns 
section, it is a redundant function] 
icce'va'madi. 
Agama Procedure 
Appearance of non-existent syllable by procedure of 
agama-‘coming’, this insertion process is called “agama” 
Adi-agamo tava-— First, (here are examples where) *agama-coming 
& inserting of new alphabet" process takes place in the beginning: 
* vutto-said. bhagavata-by lord Buddha. 
[Here, “v” is inserted before “u’’] 
icce'va'madi. 


Majjhe agamo tava—First, (here are examples where) “agama 
process takes place in the middle: 
e sa silava [so+silava] SO-that person. stlava-has Sila (morality). 
[Here, “a” is inserted between two “$2] 
० sa pannava [so+pafifiva] SO pannva-has pafifia (wisdom) 
[Here, “a” is inserted between “s and p". 
Note: In both examples, this procedure was already shown in Sutta 27, 
the Sandhi section. 
icce'va'madi. 
Uttara-agamo tava- First, (here are examples where) “agama” 
process takes place at the end: 
e vedallam-joy-related. [Here, “si” is inserted in the end of the word 
and transformed into an “arh 
Note: This procedure of changing 
the nouns section. 
icce'va'madi. 


66,899 


into “arh” was already shown in 


Vikara Procedure 
The transformation of a visible syllable into other 
different form of syllable is called *Vikara". 

Adivikaro tava— First, (here are examples where) “vikara-changing 
into different forms” process takes place in the beginning: 
e arisyam [Here, “i” changed into “a” and “ri” is inserted after it]. 
e anyam [Here, “i” changed into “a”] 
e asabharh [Here, “u” changed into “a’”] 


568 


Taddhita Kappa 


e ajjavam [Here, “u” changed into “a” and shortened] 
(The functions already shown in Sutta 402) 
icce'va'madi. 
Majjhe vikaro tava—First, (here are examples where) “vikāra” 
process takes place in the middle: 
e vararisyarh-the state of being a holy ascetic. 
[wa] vararisyarn=vara-isitnyatsi 
e pararisyarh-the state of being other ascetic. [In both examples, “i” 
changed into “a” and “ri” is inserted in the middle]. 
[wa] pararisyarh=para-isi+nyatsi 
icce'va'madi. 
Uttaravikaro tàva- First, (here are examples where) “vikāra” pro- 
cess takes place at the end: 
e yani-those which. ® tàni-those. ® sukhani-those joys. 
[In all these examples, “yo” vibhatti after them transformed into “ni”. 
This function was already shown in the Nouns section] 
icce'va'madi. 
Viparita Procedure 
Changing of a visible syllable such as “o or ava" into “u” 
and vice versa is called *viparita". 
Adiviparito tava—First, (here are examples where) “viparita- 
reversal" process takes place in the beginning: 
* uggate-when arisen. sürlye-the sun. i.e. When the sun arises. 
* uggacchati-(it) rises up. 
[In both examples, the initial vowel “ava” transforms into “w’’] . 
icce'va'madi. 
Majjhe viparito tava— First, (here are examples where) “viparita” 
process takes place in the middle: 
e sa muggacchati [sam-*uggacchati], samuggacchati-(it) rises up 
well. 
e sa'muggate [sarhtuggate] samuggate-when well-arisen. süri- 
ye-the sun i.e. when the sun is well-arisen. 
[In both examples, the middle vowel “u” between “m” and “g”, which 


is shown underlined, is a reversed morpheme of *ava". This function 
was already shown in Sutta 79, the Nouns chapter]. 


icce’va’madi. 


569 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


Uttaraviparito tàva-— First, (here are examples where) “viparita” 
process takes place at the end: 
७ digu-two cows. [Here, the last vowel “o” of “go-cow” transforms into *u"] 
° digunarh-two-layered. [Here, the applied vibhatti “si” transforms into 
“ath” 
icce'va'madi. 
Adesa Procedure 
Changing of an existing syllable to another form of syllable is called 
* Adesa". 
Adi-adeso tava—First, (here are examples where) "àdesa-the process 
of changing the vowel into consonant and vice versa" takes place in the 
beginning: 
e yunam-of “i” and “u” 
Note: The word *yünam" is to be initially based as: “iu”. Then, by this 
Sutta, “i” transforms into “y’>yu. Then, apply a genitive plural *nam" 
after it>yu-+nam. After “u” is lengthened by Sutta 89, it eventually be- 
comes a complete word “yiinarh”’. 
icce'va'madi. 
Majjhe-adeso tava- First, (here are examples where) *adesa" pro- 
cess takes place in the middle: 
* nyayogo-being always involved, constant effort. [Here, the original 
word is “nit+ayogo”. “i” transforms into “y” by means of this Sutta and 
later it becomes a completed word. The example shown in Sutta 51]. 
icce'va'madi. 
Uttara-adeso tava-First, (here are examples where) *adesa" pro- 
cess takes place at the end: 
* sabbaseyyo-the noblest of all 
* sabbasettho-the best of all. [In both examples, “si” vibhatti applied 
after these words transforms into “0” by this Sutta] 
* cittam-the amazing, the mind. [Here, "si" vibhatti applied after the 
word transforms into "am" by this Sutta. The function of all three ex- 
amples have been already shown in the Nouns section. The word “Cit- 
ta" originally means wonderful, amazing]. 
icce'va'madi. 
Evam yathajinavacana’nuparodhena sabbattha yojetabba. 


Thus, appropriate procedures should be applied in all ex- 
amples by not contravening Buddha's words. 


570 


Taddhita Kappa 


Note: Some functions, although shown previously, are in- 
cluded in this Sutta again in order to show that all those var- 
ious kinds of morphological procedures and functions can 
also be performed by means of invoking the injunction of 
this great Sutta. 


४०५, ३६५. अयुवण्णानञ्चायो वुद्धि 
405, 365. A’yu,vannanan’ca’yo vuddhi. 
[1. A, yu, vannanam-ca-tayo-vuddhi. 4 words] 
[2. A, i, प, vannanamr-ca-à, e, o*vuddhi.] 
(The second is a more detailed parsing of the Sutta) 
[V] A-iti akaro, i-1-iti ivanno, u-u-iti uvanno, tesam akara, 
ivannu'vannanam à,e,o,vuddhiyo honti yathasankhyam. 
Au vuddhi ca. 


(1) a-is to be known as akara (a-letter). 

(2) i and 1 are to be known as ivanna. 

(3) u and ü are to be known as uvanna. 

Changing into “a, e, 0,” of all these a, स, u-ü, vowels re- 
spectively, are formally called the process of ^vuddhi". 

a, 1, and ü vowels are also called the natural vuddhi. 


८८११ cce = 


Note: As shown in translation, the vowel “a” changes into “a”. “i or I 
changes into “e”. “u or ū” changes into “0”. This is what is formally 
called *vuddhi". 
By the last sentence “A, 1, u-vuddhi ca”, it explains that a", “T’ and “a” 
are also termed natural vuddhi (pakati vuddhi). 
This Sutta clearly defines the process of *vuddhi" in a very simple ex- 
planation. 
The last sentence is not found in the Devanagari edition of Kaccayana 
Vyakarana edited by (लक्षमीनारायण तिवारी and बीरबल शमा). 
* abhidhammiko 

[Here “a” becomes “a” as a result of vuddhi procedure. Re: 351]. 
e venateyyo [Here “i” becomes “e”. Re: 346] 


* olumpiko [Here “0” becomes “0”. Re: 350. The meanings of words 
shown already in the preceding relevant Suttas] 


571 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


Puna vuddhiggahanam kimattharh? 
What is the purpose of using the word “vuddhi” again in 
this Sutta for? 


Uttarapadavuddhibhavattharh. 

To apply performing of vuddhi function at the end of the 

words too. 

(See the underlined vowels at the end of each example shown in bold. 

They are the result of vuddhi procedure. Note that in the majority of 

examples previously shown thus far, vuddhi occurs only in the be- 

ginning or in the middle. Here, it occurs also at the end of the word 

through the injunction of Sutta 404. 

(1) angamagadhehi-from Anga and Magadha regions. agata’ti 
[āgatā+iti] Agata-come. iti ० ahgamagadhika-those coming 
from Anga and Magadha. [Here, “a” becomes “a”. Vuddhi occurs at 
two points in this example] 

[wa] angamagadhika=angamagadha+nikatyo 

(2) nigamajanapadesu-in big village and districts. jata’ti [jata+iti] 
jata-born. iti ° negamajanapada-the native of big village and 
districts. 

[Here, “1” becomes “e” and “a” becomes “a”. Vuddhi occurs at 
three points in this word] 
[wa] negamajanapada=nigamajanapadat+natyo 

(3) purimajanapadesu-in the Eastern districts. jata ti [jata+iti] 
jata-born. iti-therefore. ® porimajanapada-the native of Eastern 
districts. 

[Here, “u” becomes “o” and “a” becomes “a”. Vuddhi occurs at 
three points in this example] 
[wa] porimajanapada=purimajanapada+natyo 

(4) satta’he [satta+ahe] satta’he-in seven days. niyutto’ti 
[niyutto+iti] niyutto-engaged. iti ® sattahika-seven-dayers. 
[Here, “a” becomes “a”. Vuddhi occurs at one point in this 
example] 

[sattahika=satta-seven+aha-day+tika-the one who has] 
[wa] sattahika=sattaha+nikat+yo 

(5) catuvijje-in four (kinds of) sciences. niyutto'ti [niyuttotiti] 

niyutto-involved. iti-therefore. catuvijjika-are so called 





572 


Taddhita Kappa 


[Vuddhi occurs at two points in this example.] 


involved with or is skilled in] 

[wa] catuvijjika=catuvijjatnikat+yo 
Icce’va’ madi yojetabba. 
Note: All the lengthened long vowels at the very end of each example 
are the function expressly and specifically applied by Sutta 404. Be- 
sides, it should be known that any morphological procedure which was 
prescribed in the Nouns section can also be applied. 
Vuddhi-icca’nena kvattho? 
Vuddha'disarassa va'samyogantassa sane ca. 
What benefit is there by this term *vuddhi"? 
It has the benefit of making easy reference in such Suttas as 
“Vuddha’disarassa va'samyogantassa sane ca” etc. 


Iti namakappe taddhitakappo atthamo kando. 
Taddhita Chapter, the Eight Section of Noun ends. 


Taddhitakappo nitthito. 
Taddhita Chapter ends. 


573 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


574 


(a) 


(b) 


(c) 


Akhyata Kappa 


6. Akhyata Kappa 
Akhyata Verbs Chapter 


Pathama Kanda 
The First Section 


Akhyatasagara'matha'jjatanitarangarn, 
Dhatujjalam vikarana'gamakalaminam. 
Lopa’nubandhariya’matthavibhagatiram, 
Dhira taranti kavino puthubuddhinava. 


The wise of eloquent speech, 

Navigate the vast ocean of verbs, 

By big ship of broad grammatical wisdom, 
On the waves of Aorist vibhattis, 

Thro’ ocean water of the roots, 

Vikarana affixes, Agama and tenses. 
Resembling its aquatic creatures, 

Elision of n-conjoined-affix, like its mud, 
whose shore is the grammatical skill of words. 


Vicittasankharaparikkhitarh imam, 
Akhyatasaddarh vipularh asesato. 
Panamya sambuddha'manantagocaram, 
Sugocaram yam vadato sunatha me. 


Having bowed down to the Lord Buddha, 
Of infinite wisdom of boundless domain, 
Whose mind is set on the Nibbanic-bliss, 
Ye! Hearken this entire Akhyata section, 
Adorned with verbs of unique nature, 
Which is going to be explained by me. 


Adhikare mangale ce’va, nipphanne ca’vadharane, 
Anantare ca’padane, athasaddo pavattati. 


575 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


The Nipata particle ?* “atha” has various connotations, such as 

in the senses of: 

(1) adhikara (Introductory particle placed at the beginning of a text), 

(2) mangala (As a word of auspiciousness said at the beginning of perfor- 
mance of rites and rituals), 

(3) nipphanna (Conclusion), 

(4) avadharana (Restriction or limitation), 


(5) anantara (Disjunctive particle meaning “then, afterwards, after the 
section of") and 
(6) apadana (Besides, moreover, apart from that). 


४०६, ४२९. अथ पुब्बानि विभत्तीनं छ परस्सपदानि 
406, 429. Atha pubbani vibhattinam cha parassa- 
padani. 
[Atha+pubbani+vibhattinam+cha+parassapadani. 5 words] 
[V] Atha sabbasam vibhattinam yani yani pubbakani cha 
padani, tani tani parassapadasafifiani honti. 


After Taddhita-nouns section, out of twelve in each of the 
eight Akhyata Vibhatti (Verb-terminations), the first pairs of 
six are called “parassapada”. 


Summary: There are eight group of Akhyata Vibhattis for 
all Pali verbs known as Akhyata. Each Vibhatti comprises 
twelve. This Sutta names the first pair of six which are 
out of that twelve, as the *Parassapada" group. 


Here in this section, a Vibhatti is a form of verb-endings 
or verb-terminations to be applied after the roots in or- 
der to form a Verb. In the nouns section, a Vibhatti is a 


28 This nipdta particle *atha" has various meanings in addition to the mean- 
ings shown in this verse. Here in the first Sutta, the word “atha” means “af- 
ter the section of" serving as a disjunctive conjunction. Some of other mean- 
ings are (1) or (2) if (3) otherwise (4) in spite of, usually accompanied by 
either ca, or pana or api nipdta particles. 


576 


Akhyata Kappa 


case-ending to be applied after the nouns. Note this dis- 
tinctive role of two types of Vibhattis carefully. 

Tam yatha? For example. 

Ti-anti, si-tha, mi-ma. 

They are “Ti-anti, si-tha, mi-ma". (6) 


Parassapada’micca’nena kvattho? Kattari parassapadarh. 
What is the benefit by terming "parassapada"? 

It has the benefit of making easy reference in such Suttas as 
“Kattari parassapadam" etc. 


४०७, ४३९. परान्यत्तनोपदानि 
407, 439. Paranya'ttanopadani. 
[Paranitattanopadani. 2 words] 
[V] Sabbasam vibhattinam yani yàni parani cha padani, 
tani tani attanopadasafifiani honti. 


Of all the Akhyata vibhattis, the other six (out of twelve in 
each of the eight Akhyata Vibhatti) are called *Attano- 
pada". 


Tam yatha? For example, 
Te ante, se vhe, e mhe. 
They are “Te ante, se vhe, e mhe". (6) 


Attanopada’micca’nena kvattho? 

Attanopadani bhave ca kammani. 

What is the benefit by terming “attanopada’’? 

It has the benefit of making easy reference in such Suttas as 
^ Attanopadani bhave ca kammani" etc. 


Summary: This Sutta names other six pairs as “attano- 
pada”. By both Suttas 406-407, the Akhyata verbs are di- 
vided into two main groups. Viz. 

(1) Parassapada verbs and 

(2) Attanopada verbs. 


The purpose is to make a clear distinction between the two groups in 


577 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


terms of voice and the way they are used in a sentence. The voice of 
each vibhatti groups will be explained in Sutta No. 453 and 456. 


४०८, ४३१. द्वे ढे पठममज्झिमुत्तमपुरिसा 


408,431. Dve dve pathama,majjhimu’ttama,purisa. 
[Dve, dve+pathama, majjhima, uttama, purisa. 2 words] 
[V] Tàsam sabbasam vibhattinarh parassapadanam 
attanopadanani’ca dve dve padani 
pathama,majjhim’uttama-purisasaffiani honti. 


Of all the eight vibhattis which have been grouped into six 
parassapada and six attanopada, a pair of two in each of 
those two groups, are called pathama purisa, majjhima 
purisa and uttama purisa respectively. 


Tam yatha? For example: 

Among the first six parassapada vibhattis: 

Ti, anti, iti pathamapurisa. (The first pair) 

ti and anti are called pathamapurisa (The first person, i.e. third per- 
son). 

si, tha, iti majjhimapurisa. (The second pair) 

si and tha are called majjhimapurisa (The middle person. i.e. Second 
person). 

mi, ma, iti uttamapurisa. (The third pair) 

mi and ma are called uttamapurisa (The * high person. i.e. First per- 
son). 

Note: * It is translated as the high person as the word “uttama” implies. 


Attanopadanam' pi. 

Of (the next six) attanopada vibhattis: 

te, ante, iti pathamapurisa. 

te and ante are called pathamapurisa (The first person). 

se, vhe, iti majjhimapurisa. 

se and vhe are called majjhimapurisa (The middle person). 

e, mhe, iti uttamapurisa. 

e and mhe are called uttamapurisa (The high person). 

Evarh-(It should be noted) thus. sabbattha-in all eight vibhattis. 


578 


Akhyata Kappa 


Pathamamajjhimuttamapurisa'micca' nena kvattho? 
Namamhi payujjamane'pi tulyadhikarane pathamo, 

Tumhe majjhimo, Amhe uttamo. 

What is the benefit by terming *Pathama, majjhima, ut- 
tama-purisa’’? 

It has the benefit of making easy reference in such Suttas as 
“Namamhi payujjamanepi tulyadhikarane pathamo, Tumhe 
majjhimo, Amhe uttamo" etc. 


Note: This Sutta clearly sets out a pair of two in each vibhatti group to three 
persons (purisas) assigning each pair to their respective purisas. Please 
note it carefully because the assigned pairs of vibhattis are to be conju- 
gated with their respective verbs and persons accordingly. Only when 
one correctly knows with what vibhatti and purisa (person) are to be 
used together, one will then be able to write and understand Pali easily. 


४०९, ४४१. सब्बेस मेकाभिधाने परो पुरिसो 
409, 441. Sabbesa’meka’bhidhane paro puriso. 


[Sabbesarn+eka-abhidhane+paro+puriso. 4 words] 
[V] Sabbesam tinnam pathama,majjhimu’ttama-purisanam 
eka'bhidhane paro puriso gahetabbo. 





When all two or three purisas (as possible subjects) specify 
the same action in a sentence, the last one is to determine 
the purisa of the sentence. 


It means that only relevant vibhatti and number that conforms to the last 
purisa (person, i.e. subject) shall be used in the verb when multiple sub- 
jects are involved in the same action (i.e. verb). Look at example sen- 
tences (a) and (b) shown below carefully. In (a), two different persons 
with their relevant verbs. In (b), only the last person's plural termina- 
tion “tha” is applied thus combining both. Purisa and vibhattis are 
shown in bold-faced letters. 


[a] so-that person. ca-also. pathati-recites. 

tvafi'ca [tvafi'ca-tvam-ca]-you also. pathasi-recites. 

Here two purisas are concurrently shown for the same action of a verb. 
See that the second person singular *tvam" is the last purisa. This will 
determine as the purisa to be used in a sentence of combined purisas. 
See the final sentence here: 


579 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


[b] tumhe-you (both that person and you). pathatha-recite. 
(Two purisa, i.e. persons are combined into one second person plural 
in this last sentence. Only the last purisa, second person, plural 
number is used in the verb. It is to be assumed that the first purisa 
“so” is included in the second person plural form “tumhe-you both". 
This example shows how the last purisa, i.e. person, is to determine 
the verb of combined purisa. Next example is the same except the 
action of verb). 

[a] so ca pacati-cooks. tvafi' ca [tvaii’ca=tvarhtca] pacasi. 


[b] tumhe-you (both that person and you). pacatha-cook. 


Evam sesasu vibhattisu paro puriso yojetabbo. 
In this way, in the remaining vibhattis, the last person 
should be applied. 


The Three Persons 
Note: The following three Sutta Nos. 410, 411 and 412 will explain three 
persons, called *purisa", which are used in Pali grammar. Note them care- 
fully as it is one of very important fundamental aspects of the grammar. 


४१०, ४३२. नामम्हि पयुज्जमानेपि तुल्याधिकरणे पठमो 
410, 432. Namamhi payujjamane’pi 
tulya’dhikarane pathamo. 
[Namamhi+payujjamane+api+tulya-adhikarane+pathamo. 
5 words] 
[V] Namamhi payujjamane’pi appayujjamane’pi tulyadhikarane 
pathamapuriso hoti. 


When a noun [as a subject] is either directly present or im- 
plicit in a sentence which is of a tulyadhikarana (being ap- 
positional) nature, it is called pathamapurisa (the first per- 
son). [pathama=first+purisa=person] 


(1) [Singular subject & verb] SO-that person, or he. gacchati-goes. 

(2) [Plural subject & verb] te-those persons, or they. gacchanti-go. 
(In these two sentences, both subject and verb are present.) 

Appayujjamane’pi-example where subject is implicit (not directly 

shown): 

(1) [Singular verb only] gacchati-(he) goes. 


580 


Akhyata Kappa 


(2) [Plural verb only] gacchanti-(they) go. (In these two sentences, 
only the verb is shown. The subject is not shown) 


Tulyadhikarane'ti ki’mattharh? 
What is the word “tulyadhikarane” for? To show that in the 
example shown below, there is no *tulyadhikarana". So, it 
is inapplicable. 
tena-by that. hafifiase-(are) killed. tvam-you. devadattena- 
Devadatta. i.e. You are killed by that Devadatta (passive voice, in the 
2nd person). 
Note: Tulya'dhikarane-means of being in the same position. The rela- 
tionship of the subject and verb has to be directly related to each other 
in terms of meaning as well as in direct syntactic relation of voice. 
Here, subject, the killer "tena Devadattena" has no direct syntactic rela- 
tionship, but the killed "tvarh" only has direct link to the verb as the 
main principal object of passive voice verb. Hence, no tulyadhikarana. 
As a result, the first person verb termination ti or anti is inapplicable in 
this sentence. 


४११, ४३६. तुम्हे मज्झिमो 

411, 436. Tumhe majjhimo. [Tumhe*majjhimo. 2 words] 

[V] Tumhe payujjamane’pi appayujjamane'pi tulyadhikarane 
majjhimapuriso hoti. 


When a tumha (you) pronoun [as a subject] is either direct- 
ly present or implicit in a sentence of tulyadhikarana, it is 
called majjhimapurisa (The middle person, i.e. the second 
person). [majjhima=middle+purisa=person] 

(1) [Singular subject & verb] tvam-you (singular). yasi-go. 

(2) [Plural subject & verb] tumhe-you (plural). yatha-go. 
Appayujjamane'pi-example where subject is implicit (not directly 
shown): 

(1) [Singular verb only] yasi-(you) go, 

(2) [Plural verb only] yatha-(you-plural) go. 

Tulyadhikarane'ti ki’mattharh? 

What is the word “tulyadhikarane” for? To show that in the 


581 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


example shown below, there is no *tulyadhikarana". So, it 
is inapplicable. 

taya-by you. paccate-(is) cooked. odano-the rice. 

i.e. the rice is cooked by you. 


४१२, ४३७. अम्हे उत्तमो 

412, 437. Amhe uttamo. [Amhe-uttamo. 2 words] 

[V] Amhe payujjamane'pi appayujjamane’ pi tulya’dhikarane 
uttamapuriso hoti. 


When an amha (me) pronoun [as a subject] is either direct- 
ly present or implicit in a sentence of tulyadhikarana nature, 
it is called uttamapurisa (the high person, *Uttama" means 
noble or high or the last.) 

Note: Terming persons 15 a bit different from the English grammar. 
Here in Pali grammar, the third person is the first. The last person 
is the first in English grammar. Despite such minor differences, the 
role of each person remain the same in terms of actual usage in each 
language. [uttama-high, noble, last-purisa-person] 


(1) [Singular subject & verb] aham-I. yajami-worship. 

(2) [Plural subject & verb] mayam-we. yajama-worship. 
Appayujjamane’pi-example where subject is implicit (not directly 
shown) : 

(1) [Singular verb only] yajami-(I) worship. 

(2) [Plural verb only] yajama-(We) worship. 

Tulyadhikarane'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “tulyadhikarane” for? To show that in the 
example shown below, there is no *tulyadhikarana". 


maya-by me. ijjate-(is) worshipped. buddho-Buddha. 
i.e. The Buddha is worshipped by me. 


४१३, ४२७. काले 
413, 427. Kale. [Kale. 1 word] 
[V] “Kale” icce'tam adhikarattharh veditabbarh. 


582 


Akhyata Kappa 


This “kale” Sutta is to be regarded as an adhikara Sutta. 
(This means that this Sutta influences next Suttas from 414 
to 422, in indicating a specific time and tense of all the 
Akhyata vibhattis as shown by those forthcoming Suttas.) 


The Eight Modes 
of Akhyata Pali Verbs 
Note: In these Suttas from 414 to 422, (a) the eight modes and tenses of 
Akhyata Pali Verbs, and (b) when and where they are to be applied, are 
briefly explained. 


४१४, ४२८. वत्तमाना पच्चुपन्ने 
414, 428. Vattamana paccuppanne. 


[Vattamana+paccuppanne. 2 words] 
[V] Paccuppanne kale vattamana vibhatti hoti. 


Vattamana vibhatti (the present termination) is (used to ex- 
press actions or events which occur) at the present. 


(1) pataliputtarh-to the city of Pataliputta. gacchati-(he) goes. 
i.e. He goes to the city of Pataliputta. 
(2) savatthim-to the city of Savatthi. pavisati-(he) enters. 
i.e. He enters into the city of Savatthi. 
Note: From this Sutta No.414 to 422, see bold-faced letters such as 
“ti, tu" at the end of example verbs carefully. They are called the 
Akhyata vibhattis or Verb-endings which have to be applied after 


the roots. [Verb-ending or verb-termination refers to Akhyata 
vibhattis] 


४१५, ४५१. आणत्यासि्टेनुत्तकाले पञ्चमी 

415, 451. Anatya’sitthe’nuttakale paficami. 
- [Anati, àsitthe--ana-uttakale*paficami. 3 words] 

[V] Anatya'tthe ca asisa'tthe ca anuttakale paficami vibhatti 
hoti. 


Paficami vibhatti (the imperative) is (used to express) anatti 
(command), asisa (wish) at a non-specific time-frame mode 
(anuttakala). 


583 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


(1) karotu-(please) do. kusalam-meritorious deed. 
i.e. Do meritorious deed. (anatti-command) 

(2) sukham-happiness. te-for you. hotu-be. 
May happiness be for you, i.e. May you be happy. (asisa-wish, 
prayer) 


४१६, ४५४. अनुमतिपरिकप्पत्थेसु सत्तमी 
416, 454. Anumatiparikappa’tthesu sattamIi. 
[Anumati, parikappa-atthesu-sattami. 2 words] 
[V] Anumatya’tthe ca parikappa’tthe ca anuttakale sattami 
vibhatti hoti. 


Sattami vibhatti (the optative) 1s applied (to express) anu- 
mati (permission), parikappa (thought) at a non-specific 
time (anuttakala). 


(1) tvam-you. gaccheyyasi-should go or can go. 
i.e. You should go or you can go. (anumati-permission) 

(2) ki' maham [kirhraharh] kir-what. aharh-I. kareyyami- 
should do. 
i.e. What I should do? (This is parikappa-thinking about what to 
do). 


४१७, ४६०. अपच्चक्खे परोक्खातीते 

417, 460. Apaccakkhe parokkha’tite. 
[Apaccakkhe-parokkha-atite. 3 words] 

[V] Apaccakkhe atite kale parokkhavibhatti hoti. 


Prokkha vibhatti (the past perfect) is (to be applied to ex- 
press things happened in one's absence, in a situation where 
the speaker is not a witness to) at a past time-frame mode 
(atita-past). 
(1) supine-in the dream. kila’maha [kilaraha] kila aha-(he is sup- 
posed to have) said. i.e. (He is supposed to have) said in the dream. 
(2) evam-thus. kila porana hu [porana+ahu] porana-ancient 
sages. ahu-(are supposed to) have said. 
i.e. Ancient sages (are supposed to) have said thus. 


584 


Akhyata Kappa 


Note: Paro’kkha=para-beyond, i.e. pasttakkha-physical 

senses, i.e. something which had occurred without one's knowledge 
+4=a feminine noun affix. 

“kila” is nipdta particle used in indirect hearsay where the speaker 
is uncertain of truthfulness of what he heard or not a witness to the 
actual event occurred. Sometimes it means an asseveration or an em- 
phasis. 


४१८, ४५६. हिय्योपभुति पच्चक्खे हिय्यत्तनी 


418, 456. Hiyyopabhuti paccakkhe hiyyattani. 
[Hiyyopabhuti+paccakkhethiyyattant. 3 words] 
[V] Hiyyopabhuti atite kale paccakkhe và apaccakkhe và 
hiyyattant vibhatti hoti. 


Hiyyattant vibhatti (the past imperfect) is (used to express 
events that took place) in past time starting from yesterday, 
either being witnessed or not witnessed (by the speaker). 


(1) so-that person, or he. agama-went. maggarn-to the road. 
i.e. He went to the road. (Singular verb) 

(2) te-those persons, or they. agamü-went (plural). maggam. 
i.e. They went to the road. (Plural Verb) 
Note: Hiyyattani=hiyya-yesterday, i.e. a somewhat distant past+ 
ttana-having occurred. A bhava affix applicable by means of parti- 
cle “tu” in Sutta 360 +1-feminine affix. 


४१९, ४६९. समीपेज्जतनी 

41 9, 469 Samipe’jj atani. [Samipe+ajjatani. 2 words] 

[V] Ajjappabhuti atite kale paccakkhe và apaccakkhe và samipe 
ajjatanivibhatti hoti. 
Ajjattani vibhatti (the aorist) is (used to express things hap- 
pened) in the near past starting from today, either being 
witnessed or not witnessed (by the speaker). 
(1) so maggam agaml-went, gone. 

i.e. He has (just) gone to the road. 

(2) te maggam agamum-went, gone. (plural verb) 


i.e. They have (just) gone to the road. 
Note: Ajjatani=ajja-today, i.e. recent past+tana-having occurred. 


585 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


A bhava affix applicable by means of particle “tu” in Sutta 360 +1- 
a feminine-gender noun affix. 


४२०, ४७१. मायोगे सब्बकाले च 
420,471. Mayoge sabbakale ca. 
[Mayogetsabbakaletca. 3 words] 
[V] Hiyyattanrajjatani-icce'tà vibhattiyo yada mayoga, 
tada sabbakale ca honti. 
When Hiyyattani, Ajjatani vibhattis are used in the con- 


text of a nipdta word “ma” (barring the action), they then 
assume all tenses. [ma-means “do not”, a particle of prohibition] 


(1) [Hiyyattani] ma-do not. gama-be gone. (Do not go) 
ma-do not. vaca-be said. (Do not say) 
(2) [Ajjattani] ma-do not. gami-be gone. (Do not go) 
ma-do not. VacI-be said. (Do not say) 
Caggahanena paficamivibhatti' pi hoti. 
By the word “ca” in Sutta, paficami vibhatti can also be 


applied (in the context of mà, assuming all tenses). 
[Paficami] mà gacchahi. (You) do not go. 


४२१, ४७३. अनागते भविस्सन्ती 
421, 473 Anagate bhavissanti. [Anagate+bhavissantt. 2 words] 
[V] Anagate kale bhavissanti vibhatti hoti. 


Bhavissanti vibhatti (the future) is (to be used) in the (ex- 
pression of) future. 

Note: Anagata means that which has not yet come to pass. i.e. future, 
[ana’gata=na-not+agata-coming yet. i.e. not happening]. 


(1) so-that person. gacchissati-will go. karissati-will do. 
i.e. He will go. He will do. (Singular verbs) 

(2) te gacchissanti-will go (plural). karissanti-will do (plural). 
i.e. They will go. They will do. (Plural verbs) 


586 


Akhyata Kappa 


४२२, ४७५. किरियतिपन्ने तीते कालातिपत्ति 

422, 475. Kiriya’tipanne’ tite kala’tipatti. 
[Kiriya-atipanne+atite+kala’tipatti. 3 words] 

[V] Kiriya'tipannamatte atite kale kalatipatti vibhatti hoti. 


Kalatipatti vibhatti (the conditional) is (to be used) in (the 
expression of) an action that was past (without being mate- 
rialized due to adverse conditions or lack of the supporting 
causes). 


(1) so ce tam yanam alabhissa, agacchissa (Singular). 

[so-that person or he. ce-if. tarh-that. yanarh-vehicle. alabhissa-should 

have got. agacchissa-(he) might have gone already.] 

i.e. If he should have got that vehicle, he might have gone already. Ac- 

tually, he did not have that vehicle [supporting cause absent, reason]. 

and as a result, he did not go [action of going not materialized, the result]. 

(2) te ce tam yanam alabhissamsu, agacchissamsu. (Plural 
verbs) 

[te-they. ce-if. tarh-that. yanam-vehicle. alabhissarhsu-should have got. 

agacchissamsu-would have gone already. | 

i.e. Had they got that vehicle, they might have gone already. Actually, 

they did not get that vehicle [supporting cause absent, reason] and as 

a result, they did not go [action not materialized, the result]. 


Note: Kala’ tipatti=kala-time+ati-past beyond+patti-to happen. 
The term literally means “something timed out”. 


587 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


The Eight Akhyata Vibhattis 

The Pali Akhyata Verb-terminations 
Note: All Akhyata vibhattis are clearly shown in the following eight Suttas 
starting from 423 to 430. The students should try to familiarize with these 
vibhattis, twelve in each, by all means if they want to learn Pali successful- 
ly and efficiently. These are the ending-forms of Pali verbs which need to be 
familiar at all times. 


४२३, ४२६. वत्तमाना ती अन्ति, सि थ, मि म, ते अन्ते, से व्हे, एम्हे 
423, 426. Vattamana ti anti, si tha, mi ma, te ante, se 
vhe, e mhe. 
[Vattamana-ti anti, si tha, mi ma, te ante, se vhe, e mhe. 
2 words] 
[V] Vattamana icce'sa sanna hoti ti anti, si tha, mi ma, te ante, 
se vhe, e mhe icce’tesarh dvadasannarh padanarh. 


“ti anti, si tha, mi ma, 
te ante, se vhe, e mhe" all these twelve are called 
“Vattamana” (the present). 


Vattamana icca'nena kvattho? Vattamana paccuppanne. 
What is the benefit by terming *vattamana" ? 

It has the benefit of making easy reference in Suttas as 
“Vattamana paccuppanne” etc. 


४२४, ४५०. पञ्चमी तु अन्तु, हि थ, मि म, तं अन्तं, @ व्हो, ए आमसे 
424, 450. Paficami tu antu, hi tha, mi ma, tam 
antam, ssu vho, e amase. 
[Paficamr*tu antu, hi tha, mi ma, tar antam, ssu vho, e amase. 
2 words] 
[V] Paficami icce'sa saññā hoti tu antu, hi tha, mi ma, tam 
antam, ssu vho, e amase icce'tesam dvadasannam padanarh. 


“tu antu, hi tha, mi ma, 
tam antam, ssu vho, e amase" all these twelve are called 
“Paficamr (the imperative)". 


588 


Akhyata Kappa 


Paficam! icca’nena kvattho? 

Anatya’ sitthe nuttakale paficami. 

What is the benefit by terming "*Paficamr? 

It has the benefit of making easy reference in Suttas as 
“Anatyasitthe nuttakale paficam?” etc. 


४२५, ४५३. सत्तमी एय्य एय्युं, एय्यासि एय्याथ, एय्यामि एय्याम 
एथ ui, एथो एय्याव्हो, uud एय्याम्है 
425, 453. Sattami eyya-eyyum, eyyasi-eyyatha, 
eyyami-eyyama, etha-eram, etho-eyyavho, 
eyyam-eyyamhe. 
[Sattamiteyya-eyyur, eyyasi-eyyatha, eyyami-eyyama, etha- 
eram, etho-eyyavho, eyyam-eyyamhe. 2 words] 
[V] Sattami iccesa safiia hoti eyya-eyyum, eyyasi-eyyatha, 
eyyami-eyyama, etha-eram, etho-eyyavho, eyyam-eyyamhe 
icce'tesam dvadasannam padanam. 


"eyya-eyyurm, eyyasi-eyyatha, eyyami-eyyama, 
etha-eram, etho-eyyavho, eyyam-eyyamhe", 
all these twelve are called “sattami (the optative)”. 


Sattami icca’nena kvattho? 

Anumatiparikappatthesu sattami. 

What is the benefit by terming *sattamr"? 

It has the benefit of making due reference in Suttas as 


-25 


"^ Anumatiparikappatthesu sattamr1" etc 


589 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


४२६, ४५९. परोक्खा अ उ, ए त्थ, अं म्ह, त्थ रे, त्यो व्हो, इंम्हे 
426, 459. Parokkha a-u, e-ttha, ?’arh-mha, ttha-re, 
ttho-vho, im-mhe. 
[Parokkha+a-u, e-ttha, arh-mha, ttha-re, ttho-vho, irn-mhe. 
2 words] 
[V] Parokkha icce’sa safifia hoti a-u, e-ttha, arn-mha, ttha-re 
ttho-vho, im-mhe icce'tesam dvadasannam padanam. 


“a-u, e ttha, am mha, 
ttha re, ttho vho, im mhe", all these twelve are called 
“Parokkha (the past imperfect)". 


Parokkha icca'nena kvattho? Apaccakkhe parokkha tite. 
What is the benefit by terming “Parokkha’’? 

It has the benefit of making easy reference in Suttas as 
“Apaccakkhe parokkha’ tite” etc. 


४२७, ४५५. हिय्यत्तनी आ ऊ, ओ त्थ, अं म्हा, त्य ej, से व्हं, इं म्हसे 
427, 455. Hiyyattani a-u, o-ttha, am-mha, ttha- 


tthum, se-vham, im-mhase. 
[Hiyyattani+a4-i, o-ttha, arh-mha, ttha-tthum, se-vham, irh- 
mhase. 2 words] 
[V] Hiyyattanr icce’sa saññā hoti a-ü, o-ttha, am-mha, ttha- 
tthum, se-vham, im-mhase icce’tesarh dvadasannam 
padanam. 


29 Tn all three of Prokkha, Hiyyattani and Ajjattani vibhatti terminations, it 
is found "a" instead of "am" in the Senart's version. am is assumed to be the 
correct text as it is more frequently found in the Pali texts. "a" is a morpho- 
logically changed form of am. Here are a few examples (shown in bold): 
(1) bhisamülalam ganhitva agamarh buddhasantikarn. 

(Verse 30, Sakacintaniyavagga, Bhisadayakatherapadana Pali) 
(2) Ama'ham bhikkhurh addasam. (Kevatta Sutta, Silakkhandhavagga Pali) 


(3) Aham agamarh, gamar, agama, gama. (Sutta 470, Rüpasiddhi Grammar) 


590 


Akhyata Kappa 


*3-u, o ttha, am mha, 
ttha tthum, se vham, im mhase”, all these twelve are called 
“Hiyyattani (the past perfect)". 


Hiyyattani icca' nena kvattho? 

Hiyyopabhuti paccakkhe hiyyattant. 

What is the benefit by terming “hiyyattanr’? 

It has the benefit of making easy reference in Suttas as 
“Hiyyopabhuti paccakkhe hiyyattan?” etc. 


४२७, ४६८. अज्जतनी ई à, ओत्थ, इं म्हा, आ ऊ, से व्हं, अंम्हे 
428, 468. Ajjatanr I-um, o-ttha, im-mha, a-u, 
se-vham, am-mhe. 
[Ajjatanr*1-um, o-ttha, ir-mha, a-ü, se-vharh, am-mhe. 
2 words] 
[V] Ajjatanī icce’sa saññā hoti 1-urh, o-ttha, im-mha, a-U, 
se-vham, arh-mhe icce'tesam dvadasannam padanam. 
“नु um, o ttha, im mha, 
à-ü, se vharh, am mhe”, all these twelve are called “Aj- 
jatani (Aorist)". 
Ajjatani icca’nena kvattho? Samipe’jjatant. 
What is the benefit by terming “ajjatanT” ? 
It has the benefit of making easy reference in Suttas as 
"Samipe"jjatanr" etc. 


४२९, ४७२. भविस्सन्ती स्सति स्सन्ति, स्ससि स्सथ, स्सामि स्साम, 
स्सते स्सन्ते, स्ससे AS, स्सं स्साम्हे 

429, 472. Bhavissanti ssati-ssanti, ssasi-ssatha, 
ssami-ssama, ssate-ssante, 


ssase-ssavhe, ssam-ssamhe. 
[Bhavissanti+ssati-ssanti, ssasi-ssatha, ssami-ssama, ssate-ssante, ssase- 
ssavhe, ssam-ssamhe. 2 words] 


59] 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


[V] Bhavissanti icce’sa sania hoti ssati-ssanti, ssasi-ssatha, 
ssami-ssama, ssate-ssante, ssase-ssavhe, ssam-ssamhe ic- 
ce'tesam dvadasannam padanam. 


“ssati-ssanti, ssasi-ssatha, ssami-ssama, 
ssate-ssante, ssase-ssavhe, ssam-ssamhe", all these twelve 
are called *Bhavissanti (Future)". 


Bhavissanti icca’nena kvattho? Anagate bhavissanti. 
What is the benefit by terming “bhavissanti’”’? 

It has the benefit of making easy reference in Suttas as 
“Anagate bhavissantr” etc. 


४३०, ४७४. कालातिपत्ति स्सा स्संसु, स्से स्सथ, स्सं स्साम्हा, 
स्सथ Rig, स्ससे स्सव्हे, wi स्साम्हसे 
430, 474. Kalatipatti ssa-ssamsu, sse-ssatha, ssam- 
ssamha, ssatha-ssimsu, ssase-ssavhe, ssam- 
ssamhase. 
[Kalatipatti--ssa-ssamsu, sse-ssatha, ssam-ssamha, ssatha- 
ssimsu, ssase-ssavhe, ssam-ssamhase. 2 words] 
[V] Kalatipatti icce’sa safifia hoti ssa-ssamsu, sse-ssatha, ssarh- 
ssamha, ssatha-ssimsu, ssase-ssavhe, ssam-ssamhase 
icce'tesam dvadasannam padanam. 


“ssa-ssarhsu, sse-ssatha, ssam-ssamha, 
ssatha-ssimsu, ssase-ssavhe, ssam-ssamhase", all these 
twelve are called *Kalatipatti (Conditional)". 


Kalatipatti icca' nena kvattho? 

Kiriyatipanne'tite kalatipatti. 

What is the benefit by terming “kalatipatti”? 

It has the benefit of making easy reference in Suttas as 
“Kiriyatipanne’ tite kalatipatti" etc. 


592 


Akhyata Kappa 


४३१, ४५८. हिय्यत्तनीसत्तमीपञ्चमीवत्तमाना सब्बधातुकं 
431, 458. Hiyyattani sattami paficami vattamana 


sabbadhatukam??. 


[Hiyyattant, sattamt, paficami, vattamana+sabbadhatukarh. 
2 words] 


[V] Hiyyattana’dayo catasso vibhattiyo sabbadhatukasanna 
honti. 


2235. 


^Hiyyattani, sattami, paficamr, vattamana", all these four 
vibhattis are called *sabbadhatuka vibhatti". 

[Hiyyattani] Agama-(he) went. [Sattami] gaccheyya-(he should) go. 
[Paficami] gacchatu-(let him) go. [Vattamana] gacchati-(he) goes. 


Sabbadhatuka icca'nena kvattho? 

Ikaragamo asabbadhatukamhi. 

What is the benefit by terming "*sabbadhatuka"? 

It has the benefit of making easy reference in Suttas like 
“Tkaragamo asabbadhatukamhi” etc. 
[Sabba-all+dhatu-roots+ka-related to] 


Iti akhyatakappe pathamo kando. 
The First Section of Akhyata Verb ends. 


नै नैः नः नेः k 2K 2K K K 


? Note: By naming these four as “Sabbadhatuka vibhatti”, the remaining 
four should be conversely known as “Asabbadhatuka vibhatti". So, 
Parokkha, Ajjatani, Bhavissanti, Kalatipatti are to be known as “Asabba 
dhatuka vibhatti". The purpose of dividing into two groups is to make each 
group of verbs a bit distinctive from each other. See Suttas 516-519 to clari- 
fy. 


593 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


AKHYATA VIBHATTI 
TABLES 


The Verb-termination and three persons 
How they are to be conjugated and used according to their relevant Purisa 
(persons) and Numbers. 


Please carefully study the two tables shown alongside in next 
pages to clearly understand as to (a) how each purisa (person) is 
related to an individual Akhyata vibhatti (Verb-terminations) and 
how they are to be used together accordingly and (b) what are 
the relevant three persons among various kinds of Pali nouns. 
Once the students clearly understand all the necessary basics for 
the correct conjugation, only then they will be able to correctly 
conjugate and use three purisas with their respective relevant 
vibhatti (verb-terminations) together in a sentence. Note that 
those two vibhattis shown with this *mark are not widely and 
frequently used in the scriptures. 


The Formative System of Pali Verbs 
“The Roots and Akhyata Verb-terminations” 
How to conjugate them together to form a Pali verb. 


The roots 
The students should understand the important role of the roots as 
they are the bases of the verbs on which verbs are built. There 
are three kinds of roots. They are: 
(a) single stem or one-syllable roots such as: 
Và-to move, ya-to go, p4-to drink, ji-to conquer, nī-to carry, su-to 
flow, bhü-to be, etc. 
(b) dual-word roots such as: gamu-to go, paca-to cook, vada-to 
speak etc. 
(c) multiple-stem or three syllable roots such as vayama-to 
attempt, araha-to deserve, kilisa-to torment, etc. 


Note: Only the roots with a maximum of three syllables are found to be in 
use in the scriptural texts. 


594 


Akhyata Kappa 


The Vibhattis 

(The Verb-terminations) 
Before studying conjugation, it is necessary to understand vari- 
ous nature of vibhattis. There are three kinds of vibhattis based 
on their initials. They are: 
(a) consonant-initial vibhatti such as ti, se, tu, ssati, ssa etc. 
(b) vowel-initial vibhatti such as anti, ante, am, amase etc. 
(c) complete-vowel vibhatti such as e, a, à, I, u, पं, etc. 
Method: For consonant-initial vibhattis, just put the root before 
the vibhatti. It is quite easy. 
For the vowel-initial or complete vowels roots, delete the last 
component vowel of the root and only the last vowel-less con- 
sonant of the root should be attached to the vibhatti by placing it 
before a vibhatti. 








595 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


The form of Verbs 
There are three factors which play an integral part in shaping the 
form of a verb. They are: 
(a) the vibhatti, 
(b) the component vowel of the root, 
(c) the affix which is applied after the root. 


Explanation 
It is quite easy to understand a verb by looking at the applied 
vibhatti (verb-termination) if the student knows all the eight 
groups of Akhyata-vibhattis thoroughly well. 


Component vowels of the root 

(a) For the roots comprising only an “a” such as paca-to cook, 
vasa-to dwell, and vada-to speak, there is not much difference 
in the shape of verbs as it has only one “a” in it. Therefore, 
it is quite easy and simple to form a verb using those roots. 

(b) For the single-syllable roots with an “a”, it may retain its 
natural vowel sometimes. But that “a” may sometimes 
change into an “aya” in most instances of verbs 

(c) For the single-syllable roots with an “e”, it may keep its nat- 
ural vowel sometimes. But that *e" may change into an 
"aya" in some instances of verbs. 

(d) For the roots comprising either of “i, 1, प, ü" vowels in a 
root, regardless of being a single or a dual or a multiple syl- 
lable root, there used to be a slight change in the form of the 
verb. This happens due to a morphological process known 
as “vuddhi” and its follow-up procedure. According to this 
procedure, “i, Y" used to be changed into an “e”. In some 
cases, "e" changes into an “aya” and even that “aya” fur- 
ther changes into an "aya" in some instances of verbs. For 
the roots containing “u or ū”, it may change into an “o”. In 
some cases, it may further change into an “ava”. In some 


cases, it may still continue to change into an “āva 


596 


Akhyata Kappa 


Examples: 

(1) The single-stem root with “a” 

Va-to blow, to move. Here “a” does not undergo any change 
thus retaining its natural vowel. e.g., Vati (The wind blows). 
When this “a” further changes into “aya”, a new verb form 
emerges. e.g., Vayati (The wind blows). 

(2) The single-stem root with “i” 

Ji-to win, to conquer 

Here * i" changes into e.g. Jeti (he wins). 

When this “e” further changes into "aya", a new verb form 
emerges, e.g., Jayati (he wins) 

(3) The single-stem root with ‘T’ 

NI-to carry. Here “T” changes into e.g. Neti (he carries). 
When this “e” further changes into “aya”, a new verb form 
emerges as Nayati (he carries). 

(4) The single-stem root with “u” 

Su-to flow 

Here “u” changes into “o”. This “o” further changes into 
ava" resulting in a new verb form as Savati (the river) flows. 

Hu-to sacrifice. 

Here “u” changes into “o”. This “o” further changes into 
ava" resulting in a new verb form as Havati (He) sacrifices. 

(5) The single-stem root with “a” 

Hü-to be 

Here “0” changes into “0”, e.g. Hoti (it is) 

Bhü-to be. Here “ti” changes into “o”. This “o” further 
changes into "ava", resulting in a new verb form as Bhavati 
(It is) 

(6) The single-syllable root with “e” 
For the single-syllable roots with an 
into an "aya" in most instances. 
Example: Ge-to sing, e.g. Gayati (He) sings. 

Jhe-to burn, to contemplate. e.g. Jhayati (The fire) burns or (he) 
contemplates. 


6699 


66 a? 


66 a? 


it usually changes 


597 


865 


(1) THE EIGHT AKHYATA VIBATTI(Verb-terminations) 
How they are to be used based on their respective Purisa,(persons) and Numbers 


Akhyata Vibatt Parassapada(6), Active Voice Only Attanopada(6), Active,Passive,Impersonal Voice 


११0५८ Š Te Pathama Purisa Majjima Purisa Uttama Purisa Pathama Purisa Majjima Purisa Uttama Purisa 
Verh endings Third Person Second Person First Person Third Person Second Person First Person 


WHE YEMEN RENEE m | m 








UIeUeIeXeÁA I[ed euedeoory 


a 
a 


ta Kapp 


a 
d 


Akhy: 


Purisa(Persons) 


The Pathama Purisa 
(The third Person 
in English Grammar) 


The Majjima Purisa 
Middle Person 
(Second Person) 


The Uttama Purisa 
The High Person 
(The First Person 


in English Grammar) 


(2)The Persons(Purisa) and Relevant Vibattis 


Practical Word of nouns implied by each Purisa 


So (he),Sa (she), Puriso (man) 
itthi (woman), Bhikkhu (monk) 
Raja (King), Buddho (Buddha) 
Cittarh (Conciousness), Rüparh (matter) 
Pabbato (mountain), Nadi (river), 
Both animate and inanimate Subjects rather than 
You and me are to be included in this Purisa. 


Te (They-male), Tayo (They-female), Purisa (men) 
Itthiyo (women), Bhikkhü (monks) 
Rajano (Kings), Buddha (Buddhas) 

Cittani (many conciousnesses), Rupani (matters), 

Pabbata (mountains), Nadiyo (rivers) 


Tvarh (you) 


Tumhe (You-plural) 


Ahar (T) 


Mayam (we) 





Vibatti to apply 


Third Person Singular 
Such as Ti,Te etc. 
e,g.,Gacchati. Gacchate. 
(Please refer to above table 
for all the remaining vibattis) 


Third Person Plural 
Such as anti, ante etc. 


e,g.,Gacchanti. 
Gacchante. = 
uv 


Second Person Singular 
Such as si, se, etc. 
e.g..Gacchasi. Gacchase. 
Second Person Plural 
Such as tha, vhe, etc. 
.2.,Gacchatha. Gacchavhe. 
First Person Sigular 
Such as mi, e, etc. 
e,g.,Gacchami. Gacche. 
First Person Plural 
Such as ma, mhe etc. 
Gacchama. Gacchamhe. 


58.5 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


The Affix and its impact 
on the verb forms 


When an affix such as a Karita (causative affix) or other affix 
is applied after the root in a verb, it can usually affect the vuddhi 
process and some subsequent follow-up morphological proce- 
dures occur. Examples: 
Lu-to cut, 

Base structure: li+ne+ti 
(with causative affix ne & ti 
Here “0” changes into “o” as a *vuddhi" procedure. This 
further changes into an “‘ava’’> lāv+e+ti, resulting in a new verb 
form as Laveti (It causes to cut). 

NT-to carry. Base structure: ni+netti 

Here “7° changes into as a “vuddhi” procedure. This “e” fur- 
ther changes into an "aya", resulting in a new verb form as 
Nayeti (It causes to carry). 


८८, 22 


is deleted leaving only “e”>lū+e+ti) 


66 99 


6699 


The Conjugation of Dual-syllable Roots 

Of the three roots mentioned above, conjugation of the dual- 
syllable roots is quite simple and easy for beginners to under- 
stand. Study the following example of the root “gamu-to go". 
Note that the last component vowel “0” is to be elided as per 
Sutta No. 521 thus having the root-form as “gam” and consonant 
“m” of the root changes into “ech” as per Sutta 476. So, the 
steps of change for this root is=gamu>gam>gacch. See below. 


Example: gamu>gam>gacch-to go 

(a) Now, let's attach this root to consonant-initial vibhattis “ti, si 
and tha". It is quite easy as there is nothing complex to do 
except to conjugate everything together. 
Gacch+a+ti= Gacchati (He) goes. 
Gacch+a+si=Gacchasi (You) go. 
Gacch+a+tha=Gacchatha (You, plural) go 
Note: An affix "a" is applied as per Sutta 445. When conju- 
gating with vibhattis like mi, ma and mhe, follow the rule 

















600 


Akhyata Kappa 


prescribed in Sutta No.478. The rule stipulates that the front 
vowel in front of mi, ma and mhe must be lengthened. 

So, it will look like *Gaccha". 

Now, let's attach this morphed root-structure to “mi” “ma” 
and “mhe”. 

Gaccha+mi= Gacchami. (1) go. 

Gaccha+ma= Gacchama. (we) go. 

Gaccha+mhe= Gacchamhe. (we) go. 

(b) Let’s attach this “gacch” to vowel-initial vibhattis “anti, an- 
te, am and amase". Don’t forget to remove the affix vowel 
“a” because one consonant can be combined to one vowels 
only, not to two vowels. So, we have to delete it before 
combining. Look at examples below carefully. 
Gacch+anti=Gacchanti (They) go. 

Gacch+ante=Gacchante (They) go. 
Gacch+arh=Gaccharh (I) went. 
Gacch+amase=Gacchamase (We must) go. 

(c) Now, again, let’s attach this same thing to complete-vowel 
vibhattis “e, a, à, 1, u and ū”. Remember that the same rule 
of removing the last component vowel applies. Also keep in 
mind that as per the rule set forth in Sutta No. 519, there 
should be an “a” in the front of verbs applied with à, 1, पं, 
vibhattis. There can also be verbs without “a” as the rule is 
optional, not a consistent injunction. 

So, there will be two example of the verbs. 
Gacch+e=Gacche, (I) go. 

Gacch+a=Gaccha, (he) have gone. 

Gacch+a=A gaccha, gaccha, (he) has gone. 

Gacch+i=A gaccht, gacchi, (he) had gone. 

Gacch+i=Agacchi, gacchi, (he) had gone. (When “१” is shortened 
as 1") 
Gacch+u=Gacchu, (they) have gone. 
Gacch-*ü-Agacchü, gacchü, (They) have gone. 











601 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


SAMPLE COMBINATION OF THE ROOTS 
WITH AKHYATA VIBHATTIS 

The following is a completely detailed form of various verbs 
conjugated with all eight Akhyata vibhattis. The sample verbs of 
each Vibhatti will be shown here so that the students will be 
able to try conjugating other roots with all of the eight vibhattis 
easily. 

All the vibhattis, except Parokkha, Hiyyattani and Ajjattani, are 
quite easy to conjugate with any root. However, it may be a 
challenge for the student to conjugate verbs using Parokkha, 
Hiyyattani and Ajjattani vibhattis. But, with determination 
and practice, the student will find it a bit easy later on. Please 
note that the Verbs shown with this *mark are irregular-verbs 
different from their original vibhatti forms. Please see the expla- 
nations carefully so that students will not be confused with the 
irregular verb forms. It is recommended that any serious student 
who wants to learn and master the Pali efficiently should study 
these sample verb-forms repeatedly until they become quite fa- 
miliar with all verb forms. 





Note: The verb-forms shown below are plain verbs in the active voice 
mode which are easier for the beginners. For the Passive voice verb forms 
and causative verb forms, only a few samples will be shown. All detailed 
treatment of this subject are dealt with in a separate book. 


THE PLAIN VERBS 
(Active Voice) 
Vattamana Vibhatti 

(Present Indicative) 
Root: gamu-to go. The “m” of the root changes into “cecha” (Re Sutta 
476). 

[Parassapada] 
(ti) Gacchati, *Gacche. (anti) Gacchanti, *Gacchare. 

(“anti” changes into “re” sometimes) 


(si) Gacchasi. (tha) Gacchatha. 


602 


Akhyata Kappa 


(mi) Gacchami, *Gacche. (*ti, mi" sometimes changes into “e”) 
(ma) Gacchama. 
[Attanopada] 


(te) Gacchate. (ante) Gacchante, *Gacchare. (“ante” sometimes 
change into “re” 


(se) Gacchase. (vhe) Gacchavhe. 
(e) Gacche. (mhe) Gacchamhe. 


Note: Please note carefully that there is a dīgha “a” in “mi, ma and mhe” 
vibhatti verbs, as per injunction of Sutta No. 478. 


Paficami Vibhatti (Imperative) 
[Parassapada] 
(tu) Gacchatu, *Gacche. (antu) Gacchantu. 
(hi) Gacchahi, *Gaccha (“hi” elided), *Gacchassu. 
(tha) Gacchatha. 
(mi) Gacchami, *Gacche (“tu, mi" sometimes changes into “e”). 
(ma) Gacchama. 
[Attanopada] 
(tarn) Gacchatam. (antam) Gacchantam. 
(ssu) Gacchassu. (vho) Gacchavho. 


(e) Gacche. (amase) Gacchamase. 

Note: Please note carefully that there are three examples in “hi-vibhatti”, one 
without “hi” (Re: Sutta 479), the other with a “hi” and another with “ssu” 
function (Re: Sutta 571). Also note a digha in “mi, ma-vibhatti" verbs. 


Sattami Vibhatti (Optative) 
[Parassapada] 
(eyya) Gaccheyya, *Gacche. (eyyum) Gaccheyyum. 
(eyyasi) Gaccheyyasi, *Gacche. (eyyatha) Gaccheyyatha. 
(eyyami) Gaccheyyami, *Gacche. (eyyama) Gaccheyyama. 


[Attanopada] 
(etha) Gacchetha. (eram) Gaccheram. 
(etho) Gacchetho. (eyyavho) Gaccheyyavho. 
(eyyam) Gaccheyyam, *Gacche. 
(eyyamhe) Gaccheyyamhe. 


603 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


6699 


Note: Note the irregular verb form “e” in “eyya, eyyasi, eyyami, eyyarh” 
vibhattis as these sometimes changes into “6” in the canonical Pali texts. 


Parokkha Vibhatti (Past Perfect) 
[Parassapada] 
(a) Jagama, jagama. (u) Jagamu. 
(e) Jagame. (ttha) Jagamittha. 
(am) Jagamam. (amha) Jagamimha. 


[Attanopada] 
(ttha) Jagamittha. (re) Jagamire. 
(ttho) Jagamittho. (vho) Jagamivho. 
(im) Jagamim. (mhe) Jagamimhe. 
Note: In this Vibhatti group, there is some reduplication of the initial word of 


८८: 99 


root as per Sutta 458. See “ja” as the effect of this function. Also, in the 
Parokkha, Ajjatan1, Bhavissanti, Kalatipatti vibhattis, there is an “1” behind 
the root of some verbs as per Sutta No. 516. To clarify this, see the verbs in 


८८५११ 


ttha, re, ttho, vho, mhe vibhattis where an “i” is shown in bold. [See Sutta 
467 “Kavaggassa cavaggo", Rüpasiddhi Pali grammar text]. 


Hiyyattani Vibhatti (Imperfect) 
[Parassapada] 

(a) Agaccha-Gaccha, *Agaccha-Gaccha (“‘a” shortened). 
(a) Agacchü-Gacchü, *Agacchu-Gacchu (“ū” shortened). 
(0) Agaccho-Gaccho, *Agaccha-Gaccha, *Agacchi-Gacchi. 
(ttha) Agacchattha-Gacchattha, * Agacchatha-Gacchatha. 
(am) Agaccham-Gaccham. 
(mha) Agacchamha-Gacchamha. 


[Attanopada] 
(ttha) Agacchattha-Gacchattha. 
(tthum) Agacchatthum-Gacchatthum. 
(se) Agacchase-Gacchase. 
(vharh) Agacchavham-Gacchavham. 
(ir) Agacchim-Gacchim. 
(mhase) Agacchamhase-Gacchamhase. 


604 


Akhyata Kappa 


Note: Please carefully note that there are two types of verbs in each vibhatti 
one with an “a” in front and the other without it. It is as per the rule set forth 
in Sutta No. 519, but is not a consistent pattern. Also note carefully that in 
“o-vibhatti” verb, there are extra two pairs of verbs: Agaccha-Gaccha, 
Agacchi-Gacchi which is seen frequently in the Pali texts. The vibhatti “o” 
changes into “a” or “1” sometimes. It is quite rare to see verbs in the origi- 
nal structure of “0” vibhatti in the scriptures. Instead, it is seen in changed 
state of “a” or “i”. Regarding this, there is a grammatical rule in Moggalana 
Vyakarana which specifically stipulated that the *o" changes into either 
or “i” or “ttha” or “ttho” by a procedure of Sutta named “Ossa a, i, ttha, 
ttho". Also in Rüpasiddhi, a very well-known, highly respected grammar, it 
is said: ^Kvacidhatü'ti adina okarassa a-adeso va”. It means that by apply- 
ing the function of “Kvaci dhatu" Sutta (No. 517), *o-vibhatti" changes into 


a" in some instances. Although two pairs of extra examples are shown, 
all the examples can be found in the scriptures. 


I) 


Ajjatani Vibhatti (Aorist) 
[Parassapada] 
(1) Agacchi-Gacchi, *Agacchi-Gacchi, 
(“T is shortened in this second pair of verbs). 
(um) Agacchurh-Gacchum, *Agacchimsu-Gacchimsu, 
(“urh” changed into *imsu" in this pair of verbs. Re: Sutta 504). 
(0) Agaccho-Gaccho, *Agaccha-Gaccha, *Agacchi-Gacchi, 
(See foregoing notes for explanation regarding irregular verb forms different 
from the original verb-form). 
(ttha) Agacchittha-Gacchittha. 
(ii?) Agacchim-Gacchim. (mha) Agacchimha-Gacchimha, 
* Agacchimha-Gacchimha (“82 of mha is shortened). 
[Attanopada] 
(a) Agaccha-Gaccha, *Agacchittha-Gacchittha 
(“a” changed into “ttha” in this pair of verbs and “i” is inserted). 
(a) Agacchü-Gacchü. (se) Agacchise-Gacchise. 
(vharh) Agacchivham-Gacchivham. 
(arn) Agaccham-Gaccham, *Agaccha-Gaccha, 
(“arh” changed into “a” in this pair of verbs). 
(mhe) Agacchimhe-Gacchimhe 
Note: Please note that there is an “1” after the root of some verbs in ttha, 
mha, se, vharh, mhe vibhatti-terminations as per the rule of Sutta No. 516. 


605 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


Bhavissanti Vibhatti (Future) 

[Parassapada] 
(ssati) Gacchissati. (ssanti) Gacchissanti, *Gacchissare. 
(ssasi) Gacchissasi. (ssatha) Gacchissatha. 
(ssami) Gacchissami. (ssama) Gacchissama. 

[Attanopada] 
(ssate) Gacchissate. (ssante) Gacchissante, *Gacchissare. (ssa- 
se) Gacchissase. (ssavhe) Gacchissavhe. 
(ssam) Gacchissam. (ssamhe) Gacchissamhe. 


66599 


Note: There is an “i” shown in bold, added after the root of all verbs in all 
Bhavissanti vibhatti-terminations as per the rule of Sutta No. 516. 


Kalatipatti Vibhatti (Conditional) 
[Parassapada] 


(ssa) Agacchissa-Gacchissa, *Agacchissa-Gacchissa, 
(*&" is shortened in this second pair of verbs). 

(ssamisu) Agacchissamsu-Gacchissamsu. 
(sse) Agacchisse-Gacchisse, Agacchissa-Gacchissa. (The “e” of 
"sse" is changed into “a” in this second pair of verb-forms by Sutta 517) 
(ssatha) Agacchissatha-Gacchissatha. 
(ssam) Agacchissarh-Gacchissarh. 
(ssamha) Agacchissamha-Gacchissamha. 

* A gacchissamha-Gacchissamha (“a” is shortened in this pair). 


[Attanopada] 
(ssatha) Agacchissatha-Gacchissatha. 
(ssimsu) Agacchissimsu-Gacchissimsu. 
(ssase) Agacchissase-Gacchissase. 
(ssavhe) Agacchissavhe-Gacchissavhe. 
(ssa) Agacchissam-Gacchissam. 
(ssamhase) Agacchissamhase-Gacchissamhase. 


Note: In the Kalatipatti vibhattis, there is an “1” shown in bold, after the root 
of all verbs as per rule of Sutta No. 516. 


606 


Akhyata Kappa 


THE PLAIN VERBS 
(Passive Voice) 
Vattamana Vibhatti 


To build passive voice verb-forms, students should understand 

two mainly important things. They are: 

(1) The passive voice verb forms are mainly Kamma-specific in 
nature. As such, they have to be in Kamma-specific vibhattis. 
This means that no other vibhattis, except Kamma-specific six 
Attanopada-vibhattis only can be used in the passive voice. 

(2) Next, those verbs are to be affixed with Kamma-specific 
affixes only. This means that no other affixes can be used in 
the passive voice structure. 








The Kamma-specific Vibhatti and affixes 
Out of twelve Verb-terminations in each of eight Akhyata 
vibhattis, only six Attanopada have Kamma (passive) and 
Bhava (impersonal) voices. (Refer to Sutta 453). 
However, they may be Kattu-specific sometimes. (See Sutta 454). 
As for Kamma-specific affixes, only one “ya” affix applied by 
Sutta 440 is eligible to be used in the passive voice structure of 
Akhyata verbs. This basic rule is quite easy to understand and 
apply in the sentence structure. Therefore, Pali is quite simple to 
learn. 


The Practical Method 
Method: 
(1) Begin with six attanopada Vattamana Vibhattis. 
(2) Use only *ya" affix. 
Please note that the verbs affixed with “ya” have some dis- 
tinctive forms which may be a bit challenging for the beginners. 
Therefore, only more simple structure and easy to build verb- 
form will be shown here. 


607 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


The formula of passive voice form is: (Try to remember) 
Root-H or I +ya+relevant attanopada vibhatti. (4 parts) 
Now, let’s start building verbs in the passive voice: 





Root: Paca=to cook. 
Affix: ya 


Attanopada-termination 
Kamma-specific 
(te) Paciyate. (ante) Pactyante, *Paciyare. 
(se) Paciyase. (vhe) Paciyavhe. (e) Pactye. (mhe) Paciyamhe. 


Parassapada-termination (Reversed) 

Now, let’s try building the Passive Voice verb-forms using “the 
Parassapada vibhattis". This is made possible by Sutta 518. 
Please remember that these “parassapada” are actually “attano- 
pada vibhattis" being reversed to look like “parassapada”, not 
the original ones. Therefore, the voice will still remain Kamma- 
specific (i.e. passive voice) though. 

Also please know that the actual “Parassapada vibhattis” never 
signify the sense of Kamma in any way. They have only one 
voice of Kattu (active voice). Therefore, they are always to be 
used in the active voice only. This is an important grammatical 
rule to be remembered. 














Sample Passive Voice Verb 
in the reversed Parassapada-termination 
(ti) Pactyati. *Paciye. (anti) Pactyanti,*Pactyare. 
(si) Paciyasi. (tha) Paciyatha. 
(mi) Paciyami, *Pactye (*ti, mi” sometimes changes into “e”). 
(ma) Paciyàma. 


ने 2 K K K K K न K 


608 


Akhyata Kappa 


CAUSATIVE VERBS 
Like the plain verbs, there are two types of causative verbs. 
They are: 
(a) Causative verb in the active voice, 
(b) Causative verb in the passive voice. 
To be able to build causative verbs and to understand them well, 
the students need to understand two things which are fundamen- 
tal to the core structural pattern of a causative verb. 
They are: 
(1) The causative affixes, 


(2) Subsequent vuddhi procedures resulting from causative affix. 
[This needs much study and practice]. 


Method 

Causative Verb in the Active Voice 
It will be explained here in a way as simple as possible for the 
students. First, there are four causative affixes which are mainly 
used in the causative verbs. They are “ne, naya, nape and 
nàpaya". Please refer to Sutta 438. It is also important to under- 
stand that *n" has to be removed from all the causative affixes 
as per Sutta 523. There will remain only “e, aya, ape, apaya". 
One of these affixes will be used in the sample causative verbs. 
Regarding the vuddhi procedure, refer to Sutta 483. It may at 
first seems like a big challenge for a beginner. But, it is not that 
much difficult if simple guidelines are understood. The vuddhi 
procedure usually occurs in the initial vowel of the root if that is 
a two-stem root. As an exception, there are some roots such as 
jiva-to live, katha-to speak, kilamu-to be weary, which never 
undergo a vuddhi procedure in a causative or even in the plain 
verb forms. 
Now, here is the formula of causative verb to remember: 
The root with an initial vowel being in a vuddhi-one of the 
four causative affixes+relevant vibhatti (3 integral parts). 
Now, let’s work out that formula here: 
The root: Paca-to cook. 


609 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


See the table below. All the complex structural patterns of caus- 
ative verbs are shown in the table in a very simple way. 
[(1) Vuddhi procedure in the initial vowel of the root "a" as "a", (2) the last 


component vowel of the root deleted, (3) the component consonant "n" of the 
affix elided. Three important procedures] 


















































Base Structure | After three Proce- The completed verb 
dures 
Pacatne+ti> Pacte+ti> Paceti. 
(He) causes to cook 
Pacatnayatti> | Pactaya+ti> Pacayati. 
Pacatnapet+ti> | Pac+ape+ti> Pacapeti. 
Pacatnapayatti> | Pact+apayatti> Pacapayati. 





Sample Causative Verb in the Active Voice 
[Parassapada] 
Now, let’s start building causative verbs in the active voice: 
Root: Paca=to cook. 
(1st) Affix: “ne” 
(ti) Paceti. (anti) Pacenti (^a" of “anti” is deleted) 
(si) Pacesi. (tha) Pacetha. 
(mi) Pacemi. (ma) Pacema. [No digha procedure in “mi & ma"] 
(2nd) Affix: “naya” 
(ti) Pacayati. (anti) Pacayanti (“a” of “anti” is deleted). 
(si) Pacayasi. (tha) Pacayatha. 
(mi) Pacayami. (ma) Pacayama.[Digha procedure in “mi & ma"] 
Note: In verbs with 3rd and 4th affixes, there can be some verb forms 


with no vuddhi function occurred on the initial vowel. So, two exam- 
ples of verb forms are shown below. 


(3rd) Affix: “nape” 
(ti) Pacapeti, pacapeti. (anti) Pacapenti, pacapenti. 
(si) Pacapesi, pacapesi. (tha) Pacapetha, pacapetha. 
(mi) Pacapemi, pacapemi. (ma) Pacapema, pacapema. 
[No digha procedure in *mi & ma"] 


610 





Akhyata Kappa 


(4th) Affix: “napaya” 
(ti) Pacapayati, pacapayati. (anti) Pacapayanti, pacapayanti. 
(si) Pacapayasi, pacapayasi. 
(tha) Pacapayatha, pacapayatha. 
(mi) Pacapayami, pacapayami. 
(ma) Pacapayama, pacapayama. [Digha procedure in *mi & ma"] 
Note: Please note that verbs in “ne and nape” affixes are slightly similar 
to each other while verbs in *naya and papaya" affixes share some simi- 
lar morphological traits. 


Causative Verb in the Passive Voice 
This too may be a bit challenging. But remember that it is very 
much similar to the plain verbs in respect of the passive voice 
structural pattern. It only needs to insert one more affix “ya” 
signifying the Kamma (passive voice). Here is one thing to be 
mindful that not all causative affixes are used in the passive 
voice structure. Only a few causative affixes, mostly “ne” and 
“nape” are found to be used in the Pali literature. This does not 
mean that the remaining ones are not used at all. There could be 
some instances of usage. Please note that in the passive voice 
causative verbs, there used to be two or sometimes even three 
affixes though some traces of the causative affixes are not easily 
noticeable. 
Here is the formula to remember: the root with an initial vowel 
being a vuddhite or ape-i or r-ya-the relevant Vibhatti. 
(5 integral parts) 








Now, let's practically work out that formula here: 

The root: Paca-to cook 

Affix: ne or napetya. 

Assume that all three basic procedures have already been done. So, it will be: 

(a) Pacatetit+ya+ti > Paciyati. [The trace of causative affix unnoticea- 
ble in this verb with the “ne” affix, as its residual vowel “6” is already ab- 
sent except a vuddhi vowel “a” representing it] 

(b) Pacat+apetit+yatti >Pacapiyati. [The trace of causative affix is 
slightly noticeable in this verb with the “nape” affix] 





611 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


Verbs with affix: “ne” 

(ti) Paciyati. (anti) Paciyanti. 

(si) Paciyasi. (tha) Paciyatha. 

(mi) Paciyami. (ma) Paciyama. [Digha procedure in “mi & ma"] 


Verbs with affix: “nape” 
(ti) Pacapiyati. (anti) Pacapiyanti. 
(si) Pacapiyasi. (tha) Pacapiyatha. 
(mi) Pacapiyami. (ma) Pacapiyama. [Digha procedure in “mi & 
ma"] 
Note: These samples are to orient the student with the basic 
causative verb forms. It is important to study and familiar- 
ize with these sample verb forms as explained here. 


नै K K K K K K K K 


612 


Akhyata Kappa 


THE BASIC PALI SENTENCE STRUCTURE 
Based on conjugation of the verbs and various verb-forms which 
have been explained thus far in some detail, some basic sentence 
structure and the relevant rules will be explained here for the 
benefit of all serious students of the Pali grammar. There are, as 
a matter of the grammatical fact stated in Suttas, three voices in 
the Pali grammar. They are: 
(a) the active voice (Kattu), 
(b) the passive voice (Kamma) and 
(c) the impersonal voice (Bhava). 


Of the three, bhava voice is rarely used in the actual usage of 
Pali texts and a wider area of the Pali literature except in the et- 
ymological definition of words in the Pali grammar and some 
instances of the commentary and subcommentary texts where 
some detailed and delicate explanation is necessary regarding a 
word or a phrase. Even in this Kaccayana’s grammar, especially 
in Kita and Unadi chapters, bhava voice known as Bhava 
Sadhana is widely applied to explain some etymological defini- 
tion of the example words using either an Akhyata verb or a 
Kita verb of bhava sense and voice. Only active and passive 
voices are used in the majority of written Pali texts. Therefore, 
fundamental rules and the writing-method of these two voices 
only will be explained. 


The Rules of Active Voice Sentence 

An active voice sentence is called in grammatical parlance as 
“Kattu-vacaka Vakya" which means the subject-principal sen- 
tence where Katta (the agent, doer subject) is much more domi- 
nant. Such a subject is called *Kathita Katta” or “Vutta-katta” 
which means a predominant-subject. The object (Kamma) in 
such a sentence plays a secondary role. Hence it is called an 
“Akathita-kamma” or “Avutta-kamma” which means a non- 
principal object. 


613 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


Here are the rules of an active voice sentence: 


(1) The subject must be in the nominative case. 

(2) The object has to be in the accusative case. 

(3) The verb must be either in the parassapada-termination in 
most cases or in the attanopada-termination with or without 
an affix of Kattu-sense. 

[But affixes of Kamma sense such as ya, tabba, ta, etc. are 
absolutely inapplicable.] (Tabba & Ta are Kita affixes not to be used 
with Akhyata verbs) 

(4) The persons (subjects) and verbs should be concordant. 

Note: The rule numbers 3 and 4, are not required when writing 

active voice sentences using Kifa verbs and Kita affixes of Kat- 

tu-sense or past perfect such as “ta”. (Refer to Sutta 555, 557). 


Formula: 

Subject+Object+Verb [S+V+0 is possible and permissible although ma- 
jority style is S+O+V] 

Now, let us study the sample sentences shown in the table. 


SAMPLE ACTIVE VOICE SENTENCE 














Subject Object Verb Meaning 
(nominative) | (accusative) | (in kattu- 
affix “a”) 
Puriso odanam pacati Man, the rice, cooks. (Man cooks 
the rice). 
Purisa odanam pacanti | Men, the rice, cook. (Men cook 
the rice). 
Buddho dhammam | deseti Buddha, the Dhamma, teaches. 
disa-to (Buddha teaches the Dhamma). 
teach. 





Buddha dhammarh | desenti | Buddhas, the Dhamma, teach. 
(Buddhas teach the Dhamma). 


























Tvam odanam pacasi You cook the rice. 
Tumhe odanam pacatha | You (plural) cook the rice. 
Aham odanam pacami | I cook the rice. 

Mayam odanam pacama | We cook the rice. 





614 





Akhyata Kappa 


Please note that all the relevant subjects (persons), verbs and 
their numbers are to be in perfect agreement. 


The Rules of Passive Voice Sentence 

A passive voice sentence is called in grammatical parlance as 
“Kamma-vacaka Vakya” which means the object-principal sen- 
tence where the Kamma (the thing being done, the object) is 
more visibly dominant by being in the nominative case. Such an 
object is called “Kathita Kamma” or “Vutta-kamma” which 
means the predominant-object. The subject (Katta) in such a 
sentence is called an “Akathita-katta” or an “Avutta-katta” 
which means the non-principal subject. 


The rules in a passive voice sentence are: 

(1) The subject has to be in the instrumental case. 

(2) The object has to be in the nominative case. 

(3) The verb should be mainly in the attanopada-termination or 
it can be in a reversed Parassapada form with an affix which 
has a Kamma-sense only. 


[Refer to the verb and verb-forms shown in Suttas 440, 441 442 and 443. 
The easiest verb-form to use is the type of verb affixed with a “ya” pre- 


८८२१? ] 


ceded by either an inserted “i” or ‘I 
(4) The object (not the subject!) and verb should be in agreement. 


Note: The rule number four is a major distinction of Sanskrit 
and Pali passive voice sentences which is different from 
other grammars of modern languages such as English. 

In Sanskrit and Pali grammar, the subject is dominant in the 
active voice. In the passive voice sentence, the object is 
dominant. So, the verb has to follow them accordingly. 

In English grammar, the subject is more emphasized in both 
active and passive voices. Therefore, the subject and verb 
are to be in perfect agreement with each other in both voic- 
es. 


615 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


SAMPLE PASSIVE VOICE SENTENCE 












































Subject Object Verb Meaning 
(instrumental) | (nominative) | (Kamma-affix 
“ya” and “T’) 
Purisena odano paciyate By man, the rice, is cooked 
(The rice is cooked by man) 
Purisehi odano paciyate By men, the rice, is cooked 
(The rice is cooked by men) 
Buddhena dhammo desiyate By Buddha, the Dhamma, 
is taught (The Dhamma is 
taught by Buddha) 
Buddhehi dhammo desiyate By Buddhas, the Dhamma, 
is taught (The Dhamma is 
taught by Buddhas) 
Rajena tvam diyase By king, you are given 
Rajena tumhe diyavhe By king, you (p/) are given 
Rañña aharh diye By king, I am given 
Ranna mayam diyamhe By king, we are given 
2 नर न न न नर ak 2k 2k 
THE IMPERSONAL VOICE 


Q: What does an impersonal voice (Bhava) sentence looks 
like in terms of the sentence structure? 

A: It is much more like a passive voice sentence in the struc- 
tural pattern except that it conveys a Bhava sense of ex- 
pressing just mere action. Neither the doer (subject) nor 
the thing being done (Kamma) is in fact implied as a prin- 
cipal focus or the subject matter of the sentence. 


The Applicable Person and Number 
According to the most Venerable Buddhapiyacariya, the great 
grammarian of Rüpasiddhi Vyakarana Pali grammar, it is said 
that in a Bhava (impersonal voice) sentence, only the pathama 
purisa (third person), singular number is applicable. No other 
(purisa) persons are applicable because Bhava itself singularly 


616 





Akhyata Kappa 


signifies just mere action, not any materiality nor the physi- 
cal tangibility of any sort as implied by the relevant roots of the 
verb. 

Re: Akhyata chapter, Rüpasiddhi Vyakarana, Pali grammar, in 
Sutta No. 446, (Attanopadani parassapadattam) which said: 


“Bhave Adabbavuttino Bhavass 'ekattà ekavacana 'meva. 
Tan’ca pathamapurisasse va ". 


THE SAMPLE SENTENCES OF 
IMPERSONAL VOICE 

(1) Devadattena (Devadatta, the subject) bhüyate. [bhü-to be] 
(by Devadatta, became. i.e. Devadatta's being) 

(2) Pabbatena (the mountain, the subject) thiyate. [tha-to stand] (by the 
mountain, standing, i.e. The mountain’s standing) 

(3) Purisena (by man, the subject) kathiyate. [katha-to speak] (by the 
man, said. i.e. The man speaks, or man’s speaking) 
Note: Please note that strictly there is no applicable Kamma 
word (the object) in an impersonal voice sentence though it 
cannot be ruled out the likely presence of a Kamma word in 
a verb with sakammaka roots (transitive verb) of a Bhava 
structure. 


Sometimes, genitive case is also found to be employed in 
place of a subject in some Pali writings although it is not a con- 
sistent pattern. 

Re: Kaccayana Vyakarana, Sutta No. 556: “Bhave tava, Tassa Gitam" etc. 


Here genitive case is used in the context of a Kita verb to signify a Bhava 
voice and most possibly “the mere action”. 


नै वेद नः नेः k 2K 2K K K 


617 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


SAMPLE CAUSATIVE SENTENCE 

There are four integral parts in a causative sentence. They are: 

(1) Causative subject (grammatically known as Hetu-katta, or 
Payojaka-katta, the prompter or the mover, abbreviated as 
CS), 

(2) Subordinate Object (also called Karita-kamma, causative 
object, CO), 

(3) The root-object (also called dhatu-kamma, the object of the 
root which has direct connection to the root in terms of hav- 
ing direct relationship with the meaning of the root, RO), 

(4) The causative verb, CV. 

Note that there used to be two objects in an ordinary causative 

sentence although sometimes there may be some more addition- 

al objects depending on nature of the root. For example, if the 
root is a dual-kamma-indicative root (dvikammaka) such as ni-to 
carry, duha-to milk, then there can be three objects. 


Now, here is a sample of a normal causative sentence: 














Causative Subordinate | The root- Causative Meaning 
Subject Object object Verb (one 
(nominative) | (accusative) (accusative) | causative 
affix 
Puriso (cs) purisam (co) | odanam (ro) | paceti (cv) Man causes 
the man to the other the rice causes to the other 
man cook man to cook 
the rice. 
Purisa (cs) purise (co) odanam (ro) | pacenti(cv) | Men cause 
the men to the other the rice cause to the other 
men cook men to cook 
the rice. 




















This is a very simple causative sentence which is quite easy to 
understand. It is hoped that all the explanation given regarding 
the verbs and basic types of Pali sentence structures thus far is 
sufficient for all keen students at this point to make the study of 


618 


Akhyata Kappa 


the next sections of the Pali grammar much more easier and un- 
derstandable for them. 


EXERCISES 
By studying the example of verbs shown in all of Akhyata 
vibhattis along with sample active and passive voice sentences, 
it is hoped that the students will be able to do some practical 
drills by themselves using the following roots. 
(a) Now, please try conjugating one of the roots with any two or 
more vibhatti of your choice: 
(1) paca-to cook. (2) vasa-to dwell, to live. (3) vada-to speak. 
(4) labha-to get, to obtain. (5) sara-to remember. 
(b) Please translate the following sentences and determine the 
voice of each sentence and the kind of possible sentence 
correctly. 


(1) Buddho vihararh (the temple) gacchati. 
(2) Buddha vihararh (the temple) gacchanti. 
(3) Puriso gamar (the village) gacchati. 
(4) Purisà gamar (the village) gacchanti. 
(5) Purisena gamo (the village) gacchiyate. 
(6) Purisehi dhammo cariyante. (the root *cara-to practice") 
(7) Puriso dhanarh (wealth) labhati. (the root “labha-to get") 
(8) Upasako (the devotee) saggam (Heaven) gacchati. 
(9) * Puriso purisam gamam gacchapeti. 
[Please also determine the type of sentence after translating this] 
(10) * Purisa purise gamam gacchapenti. 
[Please also determine the type of sentence after translating] 


619 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


Dutiya Kanda 


The Second Section 


४३२, 3&3. धातुलिङ्गेहि परा पच्चया 

432, 362. Dhatulingehi para paccaya?!. 
[Dhatulingehi+para+paccaya. 3 words] 

[V] Dhatu,linga-icce’tehi para paccaya honti. 


“paccaya-the affixes” are to be applied after “dhatu (roots)" 
and "linga (words of the specific gender)". 

Summary: This Sutta enjoins to apply “paccaya”: 

(a) after the “dhatu-roots” in the case of verbs and kita- 
nouns structured with roots, 

(b) after “linga-gender-specific words" in the case of vari- 
ous kinds of nouns such as plain common nouns, Sab- 
banama nouns, Samasa nouns, Taddhita nouns and Kita 
nouns. 


What are the *paccayas"? 

Vibhattis and various Taddhita, Akhyata and Kita affixes 

are called *paccaya". 

Here is how to apply each relevant “paccaya”: 

(a) First, noun-vibhattis (noun case-endings) such as 
pathama (nominative case) etc. are to be applied after 
gender-specific nouns (Samasa, Taddhita and Kita words 
are also included as they are classified as nouns). 


3l*paccaya" means those through which any specific meaning of the words 


are known. It refers to the affixes and vibhattis applied after the roots of the 
verbs and gender-specific nouns (/iriga does not mean mere gender). Note 
that Akhyata affixes, Akhyata vibhattis and Kita affixes are to be applied 
after the roots while noun vibhattis (refer to Sutta No. 55) are to be applied 
after the crude-nouns. This Sutta enjoins one preliminary procedure in carry- 
ing out basic morphological process of the Pali words. 

[Reference text] Patryanti anena attha’ti và paccayo (Rüpasiddhi, Sutta 362) 


620 


Akhyata Kappa 


(b) Akhyata vibhattis such as “ti, anti" and so forth, to- 
gether with various Akhyata affixes are to be applied af- 
ter the roots of Akhyata verbs. 

(c) Kita affixes and noun-vibhattis are to be applied in the 
Kita-nouns. 

(d) Those Taddhita-affixes and noun-vibhattis are to be 
applied after Taddhita-nouns according to their respec- 
tive meanings as prescribed in the relevant Taddhita Sut- 
tas. 

Akhyata Verb Examples cited in Sutta 

(1) [Plain Verb] * karoti-(he) does. * gacchati-(he) goes. 

(2) [Causative Verb] yo koci-whoever. karoti-does (an action). tarh- 
to that person. afifio-the other person. “karohi-do! karohi-do!" 
icce’varh-as such. braviti-says. i.e. Suppose someone is doing 
something, then someone come and says “do it, do it”. This act of 
prompting is called a causative motive (Payojaka vyapara) which 
is expressed by such verbs as “Kāreti, Karenti" etc. 
atha va-in other words, karontam-(while one is) doing (some- 
thing), payojayati-prompts. This act of prompting or urging re- 
sults in such a causative verb as: * kareti-(he) causes to do. 

(3) [Nominal Verb] (a) sahgho-the Sangha, monks. pabbata' miva 
[pabbatarh-mountain+iva-like] pabbatam 1va-like mountain. 
attana'macarati [attanarh-oneselfHacarati-practises] attanarh- 
oneself. acarati-conducts (being unshaken by temptations). 

* pabbatayati-The Sangha conducts itself like mountain (when 
faced with temptations and defilements without being emotionally 
upset). 

(b) talakam-the reservoir. samudda' miva [samuddath-seativa- 
like] samuddam iva-like the sea. attana’macarati 
[attanarh+acarati | 

* samuddayati-(The reservoir) behaves itself like an ocean. 


i.e. The reservoir is so wide and big. As such, it seems like an ocean 
for its own size. 


(c) saddo-the sound. ciccita’miva [ciccitarh-sizzling sound+iva] 
ciccitam iva-like a sizzling sound. attana’macarati. attanam- 
itself. Acarati-acts. * ciccitayati-The sound acts itself like a siz- 
zling sound. 


621 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


Taddhita noun Example in n-affix & noun-vibhatti 
(4) vasitthassa apaccam * vasittho. (Refer to Sutta 344) 
Eva'mafifie'pi [evarh-thustafifie-other examples+api-also] 
yojetabba-should be engaged, i.e. applied. 


४३३, ५२८. तिजगुपकितमानेहि खछसा वा 
433, 528. Tija,gupa,kita,manehi kha,cha,sa va. 
[Tija, gupa, kita, manehi+kha, cha, sa+va. 3 words] 
[V] Tija,gupa,kita,maàna-icce'tehi dhàtühi kha,cha,sa-icce’te 
paccaya honti va. 


The affixes “kha, cha, sa” are sometimes applied after the 


roots “tija, gupa, kita, mana". [The applied affixes are shown 
underlined in the examples] 


e titikkhati-(He) forbears, endures. [wa] tijat+kha+ti 
e jigucchati-(He) detests. [wa] gupa+cha+ti 
* tikicchati-(He) treats, cures (a patient by medicine). 
[wa] kitat+cha+ti 
e vimamsati-(He) inquires. [wa] mana+sa+ti 
Va’ ti kimattham? 
What is the word “va” for? 
To show that in examples shown below, no “kha, cha, sa” 
affixes are applied to them as restricted by the word “va”. 
* tejati-(He) sharpens. [wa] tijatatti 
* gopati-(He) protects. [wa] gupatatti 
* maneti-(He) adores. [wa] manat+a+ti 














622 


Akhyata Kappa 


४३४, ५३४. भुजघसहरसुपादीहि तुमिच्छत्येसु 
434, 534. Bhuja,ghasa,hara,su,pa' dihi 
tu’micchatthesu*’. 
[Bhuja, ghasa, hara, su, pa-adihi+turh, iccha-atthesu. 2 words] 
[V] Bhuja,ghasa,hara,su,pa-icce’ va’ madihi dhatühi 
tu’miccha’tthesu kha,cha,sa-iccete paccaya honti va. 


The affixes “kha, cha, sa” are sometimes applied after the 
roots “bhuja, ghasa, hara, su, pa etc.” when expressing a 
wish (to-infinitive) 

Note: Only those examples shown with the mark * are examples. The 
other preceding words are etymological explanations of the verb which 
is not an ED. The affixes applied by this Sutta are shown underlined. 


(1) bhottu’micchati [bhotturh+icchati] bhotturh-to eat. icchati- 
(He) wants.= * bubhukkhati-(He) wants to eat. 
[wa] bhujat+kha+ti 

(2) ghasitu' micchati [ghasiturh+icchati] ghasiturh-to eat. 
icchati-* jighacchati-(He) wants to eat. [wa] ghasat+chatti 

(3) haritu' micchati [haritum-icchati] haritum-to carry. icchati= 
* jigisati-(He) wants to carry. [wa] harat+sa+ti 

(4) sotu’micchati [soturn+icchati] sotum-to hear. 
icchati=* sussusati-(He) wants to hear. [wa] su+sa+ti 

(5) patu’micchati [paturh+icchati] paturh-to drink. 
icchati-* pivasati-(He) wants to drink. [wa] Pa+sa+ti 

Va'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “va” for? 

To show that the example shown below, is inapplicable as 

restricted by “va”. 

bhottu’micchati. [Bhotturn+icchati] bhottum-to eat, *icchati- 

(He) wants. [wa] *isut+a+ti. 














32 The verbs applied with affixes by this Sutta are called “tu’micchatta 
verbs” which means verbs expressive of wish or purpose by hint of a “turh- 
suffix”. It is also called the desiderative verb in English. 


623 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


Tu'micchatthesü'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “tumicchattesu” for? 

To show that the example shown below has no expression 
of purpose “tumicchatta”. So, it is inapplicable here. (Hence, 


no “kha, cha, sa" affixes are applied in it, only an ordinary “a” affix is 
applied) 


* bhufijati-(He) eats. [wa] bhuja+a+ti 


४३५, ५३६. आय नामतो कत्तूपमाना दाचारे 

435, 536. Aya namato® kattu’pamana’dacare. 
[Aya+namato+tkattu-upamana+acare. 4 words] 

[V] Namato kattu’pamana acara'tthe ayapaccayo hoti. 


An affix “aya” is applied after the noun likened to a doer 
(katta-agent), being expressed as a metaphorical analogy. 
[Affixes are shown underlined] 


(1) sangho pabbata’miva attana’macarati=* pabbatayati, 
[wa] pabbatat+ayatti 

(2) talakam samudda’miva attana' macarati=* samuddayati, 
[wa] Samudda+aya+ti 

(3) saddo ciccita’miva attana’ macarati-* ciccitayati. 
[wa] ciccita+ayatti 

Eva’mafifie’pi yojetabba. (Please refer to Sutta 432) 


?Namato-refers to ordinary nouns assuming the role of a root in a verb. All 
the affixes in Suttas 435, 436, 437 are to be applied after nouns which have a 
specific meaning. These nouns are also called “Nama-dhatu-the root-like 
nouns” and verbs thereof are known as “Nama-dhatu kiriya" meaning nom- 
inal-stem verbs. The affix of verbs shown in Sutta 435 have usually onomat- 


opoetic expressions. Such verbs are often found in the Pali texts. 


624 


Akhyata Kappa 


४३६, 430. ईयूपमाना च 
436, 233 Iyu’pamana Ca. [Iyatupamanatca. 3 words] 
[V] Namato upamana acara'tthe ca Iyapaccayo hoti. 


An affix “Tya” is to be applied after a noun which has a 
meaning of behaving in a specific manner in an analogous 
expression. [The affix “Tya” is shown underlined in the examples] 


(1) achattam-Despite being not umbrella. chatta’miva 
[chattarh+iva] chattar iva-like umbrella. acarati-(he) treats 
e chattiyati-He treats (a big leave) as if it was like an umbrella. 
i.e. he uses it like an umbrella. [wa] chattat+tya+ti 

(2) aputtarh-Despite being not (one's own) son. putta’miva 
[puttarhriva] puttam iva-like one’s own son. acarati= 
e puttryati-(He) treats (him) like a son (even though not a son). 
[wa] puttat+tya+ti 


Upamana’ti kimattham? 

What is the word *upamana" for? 

To show that the example below is inapplicable as it is not 
expressive of simile. 

dhammarh-Dhamma, * acarati-(he) practices. 

i.e. He practices Dhamma. [wa]* 4+carat+a+ti 

Acare'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “acāre” for? 

To show that the example below is inapplicable as the verb 
and its meaning meant in sentence is irrelevant to the word 
"acara" 

achattam chattam’iva * rakkhati-protects. 


i.e. He protects non-umbrella stuff like an umbrella though it is not an 
umbrella. [wa] * rakkha+a+ti 


NS _ 9 


Eva’ mafifie'pi yojetabba. 


625 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


४३७, ५३८. नामम्हात्तिच्छत्ये 
437, 538. Namamha’tticchatthe. 
[Namamha-atta-1ccha-atthe. 2 words] 
[V] Namamha attano iccha'tthe Iyapaccayo hoti. 
When expressing wanting something for oneself, an affix 
“Iya” is applied after a noun denoting that thing being 
wished for. [The affix “Tya” is shown underlined in the examples] 


(1) attano-for oneself. patta’micchati [pattarh+icchati] pattarh- 
the bowl. icchati-(He) wants. ® pattiyati-(He) wants bowl for 
himself. [wa] pattattya+ti 

Evam-similarly. 

(2) ° vatthiyati-(He) wants cloth for himself. [wa] vatthat+iya+ti 

(3) * parikkhariyati-(He) wants accessories for himself. 

[wa] parikkharat+iya+ti 

(4) * civariyati-(He) wants robe for himself. [wa] cīvara+īya+ti 

(5) * dhantyati-(He) wants wealth for himself. [wa] dhanat+iya+ti 

(6) * ghatiyati-(He) wants ghee for himself. [wa] ghata+tya+ti 


Atticchatthe'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “atticchatthe” for? 

To show that the example below is expressive of wishing 
for others, not for oneself. So, it is inapplicable. 

* afifiassa-for other person. patta' micchati. [pattarnticchati] 


NS _9 


Eva’ mafifie'pi yojetabba. 


626 


Akhyata Kappa 


४३८, ५४०. धातूहि णेणयणापेणापया कारितानि हेत्वत्ये 
438, 540. Dhatuhi ne,naya,nape,napaya karitani 
hetva’tthe**. 
[Dhatihi+ne, naya, nape, napaya+karitanit+hetu-atthe. 4 words] 
[V] Sabbehi dhatihi ne,naya,nape,napaya-icce’te paccaya 
honti karitasaiifia ca hetva’tthe. 


When expressing a “prompting causative mode action", the 

affixes “ne, naya, nape, napaya” are applied after the roots 
of the verb. The affixes thus applied are to be also formally 

termed as “karita-the causative affix”. 


Example of Causative Singular verb, using the root “kara-to do” 
(Please also refer to Sutta 432) 
See all four affixes “ne, naya, nape, napaya” are applied in each verb. How- 
ever, as the conjoined "n" is to be elided as per morphological procedures, 


only *e, aya, ape, apaya" can be seen in the verbs (see these affixes under- 
lined in the first set of examples. Also see the long vowel “a” in the initial 


6७७३११ 


point of the verb which is a result of vuddhi procedure affected by “n 
affix). 


yo koci karoti, tam afifio “karohi karohi" icce'vam braviti. 

atha và karontam payojayati. [Re: Sutta 432] 

In other words, (he) prompts (while someone is) doing. This act of prompting 
or urging results in causative verb expressions such as shown below: 

* kareti. * karayati. * karapeti. * karapayati-(he) causes to do. [Causa- 
tive verbs in singular, all are of the same meaning] 

[wa] karat+ne+ti [wa] karat+naya+ti [wa] karat+nape+ti 


Karita-literally means the prompter. i.e. Causative. The affixes applied in 
the Suttas 438, 439, 452 are called “Karita paccaya, or causative affixes”. 
Please note that only those affixes applied through Sutta 438 have a strong 
sense of “Payojaka Vyapara-prompting or causative nature" while the rest 
are only a putative formal term in the nomenclature of Pali grammar. The 
conjoining “g” of these affixes is to be elided (Refer to Sutta No. 523) later 
leaving only component words without *n". The elision is for initiating nec- 
essary procedure of *vuddhi" of the verbs in morphological process. (Refer 
to Sutta No. 483). 


627 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


[wa] karat+napaya+ti (WA is shown in order of example verbs) 


Example of Causative plural verb, using the root “kara-to do” 
ye keci karonti, te afifie “karotha karotha” icce' vam bruvanti. 
i.e. Suppose people are doing, (then) other people tell them “do! do!". 
* karenti, * karayanti, * karapenti, * karapayanti-(they) cause to do. 
[Causative verbs in plural] 
[wa] karat+ne+anti [wa] kara*naya-*anti [wa] kara+napetanti 
[wa] karat+napayatanti 





Example of Causative singular verb, using the root “paca-to cook" 
yo koci pacati-cooks. tam afifio" pacahi-cook! pacahi-cook!” 
icce’ vam braviti, i.e. Suppose someone is cooking, (then) someone tells 
him *cook!, cook!”. 
atha và pacantam payojayati. 

In other words, (he) prompts (while one is) cooking. This act of prompting or 
urging results in a causative verb expression such as these: 

e paceti, * pacayati, ° pacapeti, ° pacapayati-(He) causes to cook. 
[Causative verbs in singular] 

[wa] pacatne+ti [wa] paca+naya+ti [wa] pacat+nape+ti 

[wa] pacatnapayatti 





Example of Causative plural verb, using the root “paca-to cook” 
ye keci pacanti, te afifie “pacatha pacatha" icce' vam bruvanti. 
Whoever are cooking. (Then) other people tell them *cook! cook!". 

e pacenti, ° pacayanti, * pacapenti. ° Pacapayanti-(They) cause to 
cook. [Causative verbs in plural] 

[wa] paca*ne-anti [wa] pacat+nayatanti [wa] paca+napetanti 
[wa] pacatnapayatanti 





Evamc-similarly in this manner, [In a different root “bhana-to talk”] 

e bhaneti, ° bhanayati, * bhanapeti, ° bhanapayati-(He) causes to 
speak. [Causative verbs in singular] 

[wa] banatne+ti [wa] bana+naya+ti [wa] bana+nape+ti 

[wa] bana+napaya+ti 

e bhanenti, ° bhanayanti, ° bhanapenti, ° bhanapayanti-(They) 
cause to speak. [Causative verbs in plural] 

[wa] baņatņe+anti [wa] banat+naya+anti [wa] banat+napetanti 
[wa] banat+napayatanti 





628 


Akhyata Kappa 


Tatha’riva [Tatha+iva] tatha-in that way. iva-like. afifie’pi-other exam- 
ples (using various roots) too. yojetabba-should be applied. 

i.e. other causative-examples should also be similarly applied. 
Hetvatthe’ ti kimattham? 

What is the word “hetvatthe” for? 

To show that the examples below are inapplicable as they have 
no meaning of “hetu-the prompting”. It is only a statement, a plain 
verb. 

* karoti-(He) does. * pacati-(He) cooks. (wa of these example will be 
shown later) 

Atthaggahanena ala-paccayo hoti. 

By the use of the word “attha (refer to hetva’tthe)” in Sutta, an 


“ala” affix can be applied after some roots. [The affix is shown in 
bold, underlined] 
e jotalati-(It causes to) shine or (it) shines. [wa] jutatalatti 


४३९, ५३९. धातुरूपे नामस्मा णयो च 
439, 539. Dhaturüpe namasma nayo ca. 
[Dhaturtipe+namasma+nayo+ca. 4 words] 
[V] Tasma namasma nayapaccayo hoti karitasafirio ca 
dhaturüpe sati. 


A “maya” affix is to be added after that noun when it func- 


tions like an actual “dhatu-the root". [The affix is shown under- 
lined] 


(1) hatthina-by the elephant. atikkamati-(he) passes. maggarh-the 
road. * atihatthayati-(He) passes the road by (riding on an) 
elephant. [wa] atihatthi+naya+ti 

(2) vinaya-by harp. upagayati-(he) sings along. gitam-the music. 

* upavinayati-(He) sings along with (playing) a harp. 
[wa] upavma-+naya+ti 
(3) dalham-firmly. karoti-(He) does. virtyarh-effort. 
* dalhayati-(He) makes firm effort. 
[wa] dalha*naya-ti 
(4) visuddha-clear. hoti-is. ratti-the night. ® visuddhayati-the 


629 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


night is clear (as being free from clouds). 
[wa] visuddha+naya-+ti 
Caggahanena ara, ala-iccete paccaya honti. 
By the word “ca” in Sutta, “ara, ala" affixes can be applied 
(after nominal stems). 
(1) santam-to be peaceful. karoti-(He) does. * santarati-(He) 
makes it calm. [wa] Santa+āra+ti 
(2) upakkamarh-the effort. karoti ° upakkamalati-(He) exerts 
effort. [wa] upakkama-ala-ti 


४४०, ४४५. भावकम्मेसु यो 


440, 445. Bhava,kammesu yo. [Bhavakammesu-yo. 2 words] 
[V] Sabbehi dhatühi bhava,kammesu yapaccayo hoti. 


A “ya” affix is added after all roots when signifying the 
senses of “Bhava (impersonal voice)" and “Kamma (passive 
voice)". 

Note: The verbs affixed with “ya” applied by this Sutta 
play very important role as passive voice verbs in the Pali 
texts. [See also Sutta No.447 for a similar kind of “ya” affix. The verbs 
affixed with it are the active voice verbs] 


There are two kinds of ya-affixed verbs. They are: 
(a) The simple “ya-affixed” verbs, 
(b) The complex *ya-affixed" verbs augmented with simi- 


35 The “ya” affix applied by this Sutta is distinctive in shaping the verb forms 
and voice. By carefully learning its characteristics as shown in Suttas 440, 
441, 442, 443, 444, the student will understand any verb affixed with “ya”. 
There are two kinds of *ya", one being applied by Sutta 440 and one being 
applied by Sutta 447. Of the two “ya”, The former is of two voices: Kamma 
(passive) and Bhava (impersonal) while the latter is only of Kattu (active) 
voice. Note the distinction of these two “ya” affixes in terms of voice de- 
spite they share similar shapes and structure. In canonical Buddhist texts, the 
verbs in active and passive voices are widely used while Bhava voice is sel- 
dom used in sentences except in matters of etymological definition of words. 


630 


Akhyata Kappa 
lar or dissimilar syllables. 


Explanation 

(a) The first type of verbs are simple and easy to build and 
to understand as they do not have any complex morpho- 
logical changes. They are usually structured by simply 
inserting either a “ya” affix only or putting one more 
vowel “i” or ‘T’ in front of “ya”. They are usually one 
single-stem (one syllable) roots such as 51” “da” or or- 
dinary double-stem or multiple-stem roots. [Refer to Sutta 
Nos. 442, 502] 


Example: Single-stem root verbs: 

Niyati, (no morphological change in this verb except a 
“ya” affix being inserted between the root “nr” and 
vibhatti “ti” ) 

Diyati, here, besides inserting “ya” affix, the vowel of 


the root is changed into an “T”. [Refer to Sutta No.502 to clari- 
fy this change] 


Multiple-stem root verbs: 


Kariyati, (double-stem root, here, bot and “ya” af- 
fixes are inserted. Refer to Sutta No. 442 to understand 
this function) The examples (1) & (5) shown in Sutta are such 
simple type of verbs. 

(b) The verb-type “b” is a bit complex as the affix “ya” it- 
self undergoes a word-form change and it is further 
augmented with either similar word of that changed let- 
ter or with a rather dissimilar word. As a result of com- 
plex morphologic changes, the affix “ya” becomes invis- 
ible in these verbs. [Refer to Suttas 441, 443, 444, 487, 488 for 
more clarification]. 

Examples (3) (6) (7) below are augmented with similar 
words while examples (2) and (4) are augmented with 
dissimilar words. If one carefully studies the examples 
below, it will be easy to understand these different struc- 


6८३११ 
1 


631 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


tural patterns of ya-affixed verbs. To highlight these 
unique patterns, all the examples are shown underlined. 


(1) * thiyate-act of standing. [wa] that+ya+te 

(2) * bujjhate-act of knowing, (It is) known. [wa] budhat+ya+te 

(3) * paccate-act of cooking, (It is) cooked. [wa] pacat+yatte 

(4) * labbhate-act of obtaining, (It is) obtained. [wa] labha+ya+te 

(5) * kartyate-act of doing, (It is) done. [wa] karatya+te 

(6) * yujjate-act of beating or yoking. (It is) beaten, or is bound. 
[wa] yudha or yujatyatte (2 possible roots) 

(7) * uccate-act of speaking, (It is) spoken. [wa] ucatyatte 





Note: There are two types of translations in each example. The first is a 
“Bhava translation" while the second signifies "Kamma translation". 
In the next sections, only the relevant type of one translation will be 
shown to avoid redundancy and confusion. 

Bhava,kammesü' ti kimattham? 

What is the word “bhavakammesu” for? 

To show that the examples shown below are inapplicable as 
they have only kattu-voice. 

* karoti. * pacati. * pathati-(He) recites. 

[wa] kara+o+ti [wa] pacat+a+ti [wa] pathata+ti 


४४१, ४४७. तस्स चवग्गयकारवकारत्तं सधात्वन्तस्स 
441, 447. Tassa cavagga,yakara,vakarattam sad- 
hatvantassa. 
[Tassa*cavagga, yakara, vakarattarh+sa-dhatvantassa. 3 words] 
[V] Tassa yapaccayassa cavagga,yakara,vakarattam hoti 
dhatünam antena saha yathasambhavarh. 


That “ya” affix, together with the last component consonant 
of the root word, changes into “ca-group consonants or ya 
or va as per relevant applicability. 


(1) * vuccate-(It is) said. sl. [wa] uca, vacatyatte 
e vuccante-(These) are said, pl. [wa] uca, vacat+yatante 
[two possible roots for both sets of examples in 1 and 2] 


632 


Akhyata Kappa 


(2) ° uccate-(It is) said. sl. [wa] ucatyatte 
e uccante-(these) are said. pl. [wa] uca+ya+ante 
(3) * paccate-(It is) cooked. sl. [wa] pacatya-te 
e paccante-(Those) are cooked. pl. [wa] paca+ya+ante 
In these examples above, the last consonant of the root “ce” and the 
consonant of the affix merged into one single “ec” and later aug- 
mented with similar “c” and it thus becomes “cca 


(4) ° majjate-(He is) intoxicated or (He is being) massaged, rubbed. sl. 

[wa] mada or maja--ya-te (the root for Ist meaning), 

e majjante. pl. [wa] mada or majat+yatante 

(Note that there are two roots based on different meaning) 
(5) * yujjate-(It is) tied, engaged. sl. [wa] yujatya+te 

e yujjante. pl. [wa] yujat+ya+ante 

In the examples above, the last consonant of the root “j” and the affix 

changed into one single “j” and later augmented with a similar 


८८22 


८८,299 


eee? 


J 
(6) * bujjhate-(It is) known. s. [wa] budhat+yat+te 
* bujjhante. pl. [wa] budha+ya+ante 
(7) * kujjhate-(He is) angry. sl. [wa] kudha+ya+te 
e kuyhante. pl. [wa] kudhat+yatante 
(8) * ujjhate-(It is) abandoned, or discarded. sl. [wa] udha+yatte 
e ujjhante. pl. [wa] udhat+yatante 
In the examples above, the last consonant of the root *dh" and the af- 
fix “y” changed into one single “jh” and later augmented with a dis- 
similar “j” 
(9) * hafifiate-(It is) killed. sl. [wa] hanatya-te 
e hafifante. pl. [wa] hanat+ya+ante 
In the example above, the last consonant of the root “n” and the affix 
changed into one single “ñ” and later augmented with a similar 














665099 


com ^ 


ñ 
(10) * kayyate-(It is) done. sl. [wa] karat+ya+te 
e kayyante. pl. [wa] kara+ya+ante 
In the example above, the last consonant of the root “r” and the affix 
changed into one single “y” and later augmented with a similar 


८८,292 


6६३7११ 


(11) * dibbate-(It is) shined. sl. [wa] divut+yat+te 
e dibbante. pl. [wa] divutyatante 
In the example above, the last consonant of the root “v” and the affix 


633 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


“y” changed into one single “b” and later augmented with a similar 
“bh”, 


४४२, ४४८. इवण्णागमो वा 
442, 448. Ivanna'gamo va. [Ivanna-dgamotva. 2 words] 
[V] Sabbehi dhatühi yamhi paccaye pare ivanna’ gamo hoti va. 


Either “i or Y" is to be inserted after all roots when a “ya” 
affix follows (after the root). [Usually in front of “ya” affix]. 


(1) * kartyate, * kartyati-(It is) done. [wa] karatyatte (both are 
the same but the second is a Prassapada-reversed verb) 

(2) * gacchiyate, ° gacchiyati-(It's) gone. 
[wa] gamu-ya-te (Both are the same) 


Note: Please keep in mind that in each pair of verbs, the first is of At- 

tanopada verb-group while the second verb form is a reversed verb- 

form of Attanopada into Parassapada. However, the voice still re- 

mains only in passive mode regardless of change. Of also greatly im- 

portant is to note that these verb-forms applied by the function of this 

Sutta are for purely passive voice use only. They are never to be 

used in the active voice mode like the verbs which share the same 

morphological procedures prescribed in Sutta 441, 442, 443. They can 
be used interchangeably either as active or passive voice depending on 
the sense and voice of affix “ya” in addition to contextual nature of sen- 
tence. For example, being in the presence or absence of an Avutta-katta 

(i.e. non-principal subject) in a sentence. This means that: 

(a) If the sense and voice of the affix “ya” is Kamma as per Sutta 440, 
and have a non-principal subject (Avutta-katta) in the sentence, then 
it will surely be a passive voice verb. 

(b) If it is a “ya” affix as per Sutta 447 without the presence of an Avut- 
ta-katta (non-principal subject) in the sentence, then it will be an ac- 
tive voice verb. 


634 


Akhyata Kappa 


Va'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “va” for? 

To show that as restricted by the word “va”, there is no “i or 
1" applied in the example below. 

* kayyate. [wa] karatya-te 


४४३, ४४९. पुब्बरूपञ्च 
443, 449. Pubbarüpafi'ca. [Pubbarüparn-ca. 2 words] 
[V] Sabbehi dhatühi yapaccayo pubbarüpa'mapajjate va. 


A “ya” affix sometimes undergoes a morphological proce- 
dure of pubbarüpa, (changing into a consonant similar to 
the last consonant of the root). [Pubba-of front, the preceding let- 


ter of the root. i.e. the last consonant of root-rüpa-shape. i.e. assimila- 
tion]. 


Note: Example verb (1) and (5) are anomalous verbs. 
(1) ° vuddhate-(It's) grown. [wa] vadhat+yatte 


In the example above, the affix “y” changed into “dh”. So it becomes 
*vadh*dha-te" [It is still a pubbarüpa, similar syllables]. Later on. 
the last word of the root has to be changed into a “0” by Sutta 612 
The “a” of “va” further changes into an “u” by Sutta 517 bringing the 
word to completion. (This is an anomalous verb of dissimilar sylla- 
bles whose morphological procedure is a bit complex for the begin- 
ners). 

(2) * phallate-(It is) finished or come to fruition. 

[wa] phala+yat+te 

In this example, the affix changed into “1”. [This is a simple pub- 
barüpa verb of similar syllables] 

(3) * dammate-(It is) tamed. [wa] damutya+te 
In this example, the affix “y” changed into [This is a simple 
pubbarüpa verb of similar syllables] 

(4) * sakkate-(It is) honored. [wa] saka+yatte 
In this example, the affix “y” changed into “k”. [This is a simple 
pubbarüpa verb of similar syllables] 

(5) * labbhate-(It is) obtained. [wa] labhat+ya+te 
In this example, the affix “y” changed into “bh”. Later on, the last 
consonant “bh” of the root is to be changed into “b” by Sutta 20 or 
517 [This is an anomalous verb with dissimilar augmentation] 





6६२7११ 


८८, 99 


635 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


(6) * dissate-(It is) seen. [wa] disa+ya+te 
In this example, the affix “y” changed into “s”. [This is a simple pub- 
barüpa verb of similar syllables or assimilation] 


४४४, ५११. तथा कत्तरि च 

444, 511. Tatha kattari ca. [Tatha+kattari+ca. 3 words] 

[V] Yatha hettha bhavakammesu yapaccayassa adeso hoti, 
tatha kattari'pi yapaccayassa adeso katabbo. 


The morphological procedures on “ya” affix prescribed in 
previous Suttas are to be similarly applied to “ya” affix (of 
active voice as prescribed in forthcoming Sutta 447 "Diva" 
dito yo"). 

Note: This Sutta enjoins that the two functions of Sutta 441, 443 are to 
be similarly applied on the “ya-affixed verbs" of Sutta 447 too. So, the 
function of all examples are easily understandable. The only difference 
is that these verbs are not applicable for the reversal procedure into 
Parassapada as they themselves are basically of the Parassapadas whose 
voice is always "active voice". This is the reason why the verb-ending 
is only Parassapada “ti”, not “te”. (See the applied-functions in the ex- 
amples shown underlined.) 


(1) * bujjhati-(He) knows. [wa] budhatya+ti 

(2) * vijjhati-(It) penetrates. (as with a sharp object or by means of 
sharp intellect) [wa] vidhatya+ti 
[These verbs are augmented with dissimilar syllables] 

(3) * mafifiati-(He) knows. [wa] mana+ya+ti 

(4) * sibbati-(He) sews. [wa] sivutya-ti 
[These verbs are augmented with similar syllables] 


636 


Akhyata Kappa 


४४५, ४३३. भूवादितो or 
445, 433. Bhüva'dito 900, [Bhü-adito-a. 2 words] 
[V] Bhü-icce'vamadito dhatuganato apaccayo hoti kattari. 


An “a” affix is to be added after the roots “bhū” etc. in the 
sense of active voice of Katta (the agent). 
[The applied affix “a” is shown in bold, underlined. ] 


e bhavati-(It) becomes. [wa] bhtit+a+ti 
e pathati-(He) recites. [wa] pathatatti 
e pacati-(He) cooks. [wa] pacata+ti 

* jayati-(He) conquers. [wa] jitatti 


४४६, ५०९. रुधादितो निग्गहितपुब्बञ्च 


446, 509. Rudha’dito niggahitapubban’ca. 
[Rudha-adito+niggahita-pubbamt+tca. 3 words] 
[V] Rudha-icce’va’madito dhatuganato apaccayo hoti kattari. 
Pubbe niggahita’ gamo hoti. 


An “a” affix is to be added after the root “rudha” etc. in the 
sense of the active voice (Katta). Besides, a “niggahita” is 
also to be put on top of the first component consonant of the 
root. 

Note: That Niggahita later changes into one of “ñ, fi, n, n, m" based on 


36५ | the affixes applied by eight Suttas from 445 to 452 are called 
“Vikarana paccaya" which means the distinctive affixes. In the word 
“Vikarana”, vi=means special, to be distinctive, karana-doing, i.e. the affix- 
es that make each verb distinctive. All the Akhyata verbs are classified into 
eight groups based on those eight affixes. They are: Bhüvadi gana (bhü- 
group verbs), Rudhadi gana (rudha-group verbs), Divadi gana (divu-group 
verbs), Svadi gana (su-group verbs), Kryadi gana (ki-group verbs), Gahadi 
gana (gaha-group verbs), Tanadi gana (tanu-group verbs), Curadi gana 
(cura-group verbs). All verbs of each group are to be used as active voice 
verbs. As for those “ya-affixed verbs" per Sutta 440, they are to be re- 
garded as the passive voice verbs of those eight groups and other verbs. 


637 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


the next consonant it precedes as prescribed in Sutta 31. The trans- 
formed “n” of niggahita is shown in bold, underlined. 


e rundhati-(He) obstructs. [wa] rudhata+ti 


e chindati-(He) cuts. [wa] chidata+ti 
e bhindati-(He) breaks. [wa] bhidat+atti 





Caggahanena i, I, e, o-iccete paccaya honti niggahitapub- 
bafi'ca. 

By the word “ca” in Sutta, “i, I, e, o” affixes can also be ap- 
plied while a niggahita is inserted on top of initial letter of 
the root. 

Note: The transformed “n” and “m” of niggahita and all four affixes are 
shown in bold, underlined. 

e rundhiti, [wa] rudhat+i+ti 
e rundhiti, [wa] rudha+i+ti 
e rundheti, [wa] rudhate+ti 

e rundhoti-(he) obstructs. [wa] rudha+o+ti 
e sumbhoti-(he) beats. [wa] subha+o+ti 
° parisumbhoti-(He) beats. [wa] pariVsubha+otti 


४४७, ५१०. दिवादितो यो 

447, 510. Diva'dito yo. [Divu-aditotyo. 2 words] 

[V] Divu-icce’va’madito dhatuganato yapaccayo hoti kattari. 
A “ya” affix is to be added after the roots “divu” etc. in the 
sense of the active voice (Katta). 

















e dibbati-(It) shines or (He) plays. [wa] divu+ya+ti 

e sibbati-(He) sews. [wa] sivu+ya+ti 

e yujjhati-(He) fights or engages. [wa] yujatya+ti 

e vijjhati-(It) penetrates. [wa] vidhatya+ti 

e bujjhati-(He) knows. [wa] budha+ya+ti. 

Note: All the verbs affixed with “ya” applied by this Sutta are the ac- 


tive voice only. The meanings of verb are translated based on the possi- 
ble meaning of the root. 


638 


Akhyata Kappa 


४४८, ५१२. स्वादितो णुणाउणा च 
448, 512. Sva' dito nu,na,una ca. 
[Su-adito-nu, na, una*ca. 3 words] 
[V] Su-icce'va'madito dhatuganato nu,na,una-icce'te paccaya 
honti kattari. 


The affixes “nu, na, una” are added after the roots "su" etc. 
in the sense of the active voice of Katta. 

Note: The affixes are shown in bold. The “u” of affix “nu” changes in- 

to *o" through vuddhi procedure. There are two verbs with different af- 

fixes for each root, but of the same meaning. 





(1) [nu] ° abhisunoti, [wa] abhi-Nsu--nu-ti 
[na] ° abhisunati-(he attentively) listens. [wa] abhiNsu--na-ti 
(2) [nu] * samvunoti, [wa] sarn-Vvutnutti 
[na] ° sarnvunati-(he) protects or prevents. 
[wa] sarnVvu+na-+ti 
(3) [nu] ° Avunoti [wa] 4-Vvu-+nutti 
[na] ° Avunati-(he) protects or prevents. [wa] a-Vvutnatti 
(4) [nu] ° papunoti, [wa] pa-Vapatnutti. 
[una] * papunati-(he) reaches. [wa] pa-Vapatunatti. 











४४९, ५१३. कियादितो ना 
449, 513 Ki'yadito na. [Kraditotna. 2 words] 
[V] K1-icce’va’madito dhatuganato na-paccayo hoti kattari. 


A “पात्र” affix is to be added after the roots “kT? etc. in the 
sense of the active voice (Katta). 


Note: The affix is shown in bold. The “n” of affix “na” changes into 


ceo? 


“p” in the first example. 1" of the root “kT” is sometimes shortened into 


८6९१9 


1 





e kinàati-(he) purchases. [wa] kr*na-ti. 
e jinati-(he) conquers. [wa] jitna+ti. 
e dhunati-(it) shakes. [wa] dhu+na+ti. 
e munati-(he) knows. [wa] muna+na+ti. 

[The last “n” of the root is to be elided in this example] 














639 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


e lunati-(he) cuts or harvests. [wa] lut+na+ti. 
e punati-(it) cleanses. [wa] pu--na-ti. 


४५०, ५१७. गहादितो प्पण्हा 

450, 517. Gaha’dito ppa,nha. [Gaha-adito+ppa, nha. 2 words] 

[V] Gaha-icce’va’madito dhatuganato ppa,nha, icce'te 
paccaya honti kattari. 


The “ppa, nha” affixes are added to the root “gaha” etc. in 


the sense of the active voice (Katta). (The affixes are shown in 
bold.) 


e gheppati, [wa] gaha*ppa-ti. 
e ganhati-(he) takes. [wa] gaha+nha+ti. 


४५१, ५२०. तनादितो ओयिरा 

451 $ 520. Tana’dito o,yira. [Tanu-aditoto, yira. 2 words] 

[V] Tanu-icce' va' madito dhatuganato o,yira-icce'te paccaya 
honti kattari. 


The “o, yira” affixes are added after the roots “tanu” etc. in 


the sense of the active voice (Katta). (The affixes are shown in 
bold, underlined.) 


* tanoti-(it) expands or stretches. [wa] tanu+o+ti. 
e tanohi-Expand! (command). [wa] tanu+o+hi. 

e karoti-(he) does. [wa] kara+o+ti. 

e karohi-Do! (command). [wa] karatothi. 

e kayirati-(he) does. [wa] karat+yiratti. 

e kayirahi-Do! (command). [wa] karat+yirathi. 


४५२, ५२५. चुरादितो णेणया 
452, 525. Cura’ dito ne,naya. [Cura-adito-ne, naya. 2 words] 
[V] Cura-icce'va' madito dhatuganato ne,naya-icce’ te 
paccaya honti kattari, karitasafifia ca. 
The “ne, naya" affixes are added after the roots “cura” etc. 
in the sense of the active voice (Katta). Those affixes are al- 


640 


Akhyata Kappa 


so to be formally termed as “karita”’. 

(The affixes are shown underlined.) 

Note: Although formally named as “karita”, these affixes have no na- 
ture of *payojaka-vyapara-the prompting”. The purpose of naming as 
“Karita” is to initiate vuddhi procedure and to serve as distinctive mark 
of the Curadi-verb-groups. 


(1) ° coreti, [wa] cura+ne+ti. 
e corayati-(He) steals. [wa] cura+nayatti. 
(2) ° cinteti, [wa] cinta+ne+ti. 
e cintayati-(He) thinks. [wa] cinta+nayatti. 
(3) ° manteti, [wa] mantat+ne+ti. 
e mantayati-(He) consults or speaks. [wa] manta-*naya-ti. 


४५३, ४४४. अत्तनोपदानि भावे च कम्मनि 


453, 444. " Attanopadani bhave ca kammani. 
[Attanopadani+bhavet+ca+kammani. 4 words] 


[V] Bhave ca kammani ca attanopadani honti. 


The Vibhattis of “attanopada-group” are in the sense of 
“bhava and kamma” voice. 


* uccate, * uccante, * majjate, * majjante, * yujjate, 
* yujjante, * kujjhate, * kujjhante, (Refer to Sutta 441) 
e labbhate, [wa] labhat+ya+te. ® labbhante. 

[wa] labha-ya-ante. (Refer to Sutta 443) 
* kayyate, * kayyante. (Refer to Sutta 441) 


37This Sutta clearly defines the voice of all Attanopada Akhyata verbs. When 
those Akhyata verbs in Attanopada vibhatti-termination signify one of these 
two voices, they used to have a *ya-affix" (per Sutta 440) in them. As such, 
any sentence structure using those verbs should follow relevant grammatical 
rules regarding the voices they signify. 


641 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


४५४, ४४०. कत्तरि च 
454, 440 Kattari?? Ca. [Kattari*ca. 2 words] 
[V] Kattari ca attanopadani honti. 


The "attanopada-group" vibhattis can also be in *katta" 


the active voice. 
Summary: This Sutta indicates that verbs in "Attanopada-terminations" 
can also be in the sense of Katta, as the active voice verbs. 


(1) ° mafifiate-(he) knows or thinks. [wa] manat+ya+te. 

(2) * rocate-(it) shines. [wa] rucata+te. 

(3) * socate-(he) worries. [wa] sucata+te. 

(4) * bujjhate-(he) knows. [wa] budha-ya-te. 

(5) * jayate-(it) arises. [wa] janatyatte. [The last “n” of the root 
is elided and “a” of the root lengthened] 





The Sutta No. 454 indicates again that the Akhyata verbs of Attanopada 
vibhatti-termination can also sometimes signify Kattu (active) voice. Please 
do not be confused by injunction of this Sutta. The Akhyata verbs in At- 
tanopada vibhatti group signify active voice on condition that the verbs are 
either be affixed in kattu-voiced affixes or be without it, but no Kamma- 
voiced affix in them. Otherwise they will be only in passive voice. Studying 
the examples shown in Sutta will clarify this fact more clearly. Here, ex- 
amples 1,4,5 are applied with kattu-voiced “ya” affix as per Sutta No. 447, 
while 2, 3 are applied with a kattu-voiced “a” affix per Sutta No. 445. 


642 


Akhyata Kappa 


४५५, 430. धातुप्पच्चयेहि विभत्तियो 


455, 530. Dhàtuppaccayehi?? vibhattiyo. 
[Dhatuppaccayehi+vibhattiyo. 2 words] 
[V] Dhatunidditthehi paccayehi kha’ dikarita’ntehi vibhattiyo 
honti. 


The vibhattis are applied only after the affixes starting with 
“kha and ending in karita causative affixes”, formally 
known as “dhatuniddittha affixes” have been first applied. 


e titikkhati, ® jigucchati, ° vimarhsati, ° samuddayati, 
* puttryati, * kareti, * paceti. (Refer to Sutta 433, 435, 438) 


४५६, ४३०. कत्तरि परस्सपदं 
456, 430. Kattari parassapadarn', 


[Kattari*parassapadam. 2 words] 
[V] Kattari parassapadam hoti. 


The “prassapada-group vibhattis" are in the sense and 


voice of the “katta (agent or active)". 
Summary: This Sutta indicates that “verbs of parassapada-vibhatti 
termination" are to be applied in the active voice only. 


This Sutta enjoins that all the *dhatu-paccaya affixes” are to be applied 
first after the roots prior to any Akhyata vibhattis are applied. Normally, in a 
morphological procedure of an Akhyata verb, setting up the root, eliding the 
last component vowel of the root and then applying relevant Akhyata vibhatti 
are standard procedures. Application of the affixes is next in the order of 
common procedure. What are “dhatu paccaya" affixes? They are: kha, cha, 
sa, aya, Iya, ne, naya, nape, napaya, ala, ara and ala. All these affixes are 
applied through Suttas 433, 434, 435, 436, 437, 438, 439. These are also 
called “dhatu niddittha affixes”. 

“This Sutta sets forth the voice of the Akhyata verbs in Parassapada group 
termination as the Kattu (active) voice. Studying the examples carefully will 
show that they are affixed in Kattu-voiced affixes. This is a consistent rule 
and morphological pattern being applied in every Akhyata verbs of the active 
voice. 


643 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


* karoti, * pacati, * pathati, * gacchati. 
[Refer to the preceding Suttas] 


४५७, ४२४. भूवादयो धातवो 
457, 424. Bhüva'dayo^! dhatavo. 
[Bhü-adayo-dhatavo. 2 words] 
[V] Bhi-icceva’madayo ye saddagana, te dhatusafina honti. 


The root words such as “bhū” and so forth are formally 
called *dhatu". 


(1) ° bhavati-(It) is, it becomes. sl. [wa] bhtit+a+ti. 
e bhavanti-(they) are, they become. pl. [wa] bhū+a+anti. 
(2) ° carati-(He) practices or moves. sl. [wa] carata+ti. 
e caranti, pl. [wa] cara+atanti. 
(3) * pacati-(He) cooks. sl. [wa] pacata+ti. 
e pacanti, pl. [wa] pacatatanti. 
(4) * cintayati-(He) thinks. sl. [wa] cintat+naya+ti. 
e cintayanti, pl. [wa] cinta+nayatanti. 
(5) ° hoti-(It) is. sl. [wa] hū+a+ti. 
e honti, pl. [wa] hū+a+anti. 
(6) * gacchati-(He) goes. sl. [Wa] gamu+a+ti. 
e gacchanti pl. [wa] gamu+a+anti. 


Iti akhyatakappe dutiyo kando. 
The Second Section of Akhyata Verb ends. 


“This Sutta formally names the words such as “bhū” etc, as dhàtu (the 
root) of all verbs in the Pali language and its grammar. The roots play great- 
ly important role as the building blocks of verbs and various words. 
Therefore, studying the roots and their meaning is also an important part of 
the grammar study. With broader understanding of the roots, one can multi- 
ply different word-structures. 


644 


Akhyata Kappa 


Tatiya Kanda 
The Third Section 


४५८, VEL. क्वचादिवण्णान मेकस्सरानं द्वेभावो 
458, 461. Kvaca'divannana'mekassaranam 
dvebhavo”. 
B [Kvacit+adivannanam-+ekassaranam+dvebhavo. 4 words] 
[V] Adibhütanam vannanam ekassaranam kvaci dvebhavo hoti. 


The initial consonant of the root is sometimes reduplicated 

with a similar word of the same vowel. 

Note: See the reduplicated syllables shown in bold underlined. Due to 

morphological changes after reduplication procedure, there are some 

examples which have dissimilar syllables in different forms. 

* titikkhati-(he) bears or is patient with. ० jigucchati-(he) detests. 

e tikicchati-(he) cures. * Vimarhsati-(he) investigates. 

* bubhukkhati-(He) wants to eat. * pivasati-(He) wants to drink. 
[Refer to Sutta 433-434 for WA of these examples] 

e daddallati-(It) shines. [wa] dalat+a+ti. 

e dadati-(He) gives. [wa] dā+a+ti. 

e jahati-(He) abandons. [wa] ha+a+ti. 

e cankamati-(He) paces up and down. [wa] kamu+a+ti. 


Kvacr'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “kvaci” for? 

To show that “reduplication procedure" is not applied in 
some examples shown below as restricted by the word 
“kvaci”. 

* kampati, [wa] kapi+a+ti. * calati-(He) trembles. (Both verbs 
are of same meaning) [wa] calata+ti. 


“This reduplication procedure is usually applicable only in verbs applied 
with affixes shown in Suttas 433-434. Other Akhyata verbs applied with 
“vikarana” affixes can also be redoubled when they are in Parokkha vibhatti 
and in a few other vibhatti-terminations too. 


645 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


४५९, ४६२. पुब्बो ब्भासो 
459, 462. Pubbo’bbhaso. [Pubbo+abbhaso. 2 words] 
[V] Dvebhütassa dhatussa yo pubbo, so abbhasasafifio? hoti. 


The duplicated initial consonant (as per the previous Sutta) 
is to be formally named as an *abbhasa". 

Summary: This Sutta enjoins to name the reduplicated syl- 
lable as an *abbhasa". 


e dadhati-(He) carries. [wa] dha+a+ti. * dadati, [Re: Sutta 458] 
e babhüva-(It) was. [wa] bhü-a ("a" is a Parokka vibhatti, not affix) 


४६०, ५०६. TR 
460, 506. Rasso. [Rasso. 1 word] 
[V] Abbhase vattamanassa sarassa rasso hoti. 


The component digha vowel of duplicated consonant 
named as “abbhasa” is shortened. 

Summary: This Sutta shortens a long vowel of reduplicat- 
ed *abbhasa". [See the shortened vowel in the examples shown un- 
derlined.] 


e dadhati, ° jahati. 


^ Abbhasa means “something additionally said, i.e. an extra word”. 
[a-additionally+bhasa-said, an extra-word. The initial “a” is shortened with 
one dissimilar “0” augmented.] 


646 


Akhyata Kappa 


४६१, ४६४. दुतियचतुत्थानं पठमततिया 
461, 464. Dutiyacatutthanam pathama,tatiya'^. 
[Dutiya, catutthanam-pathama, tatiya. 2 words] 
[V] Abbhasagatanam dutiya,catutthanam pathama,tatiya 
honti. 


Those abbhasa consonants which are dutiya (the second), 
catuttha (the fourth) in the vagga groups, are to be changed 
into pathama (the first), tatiya (the third) consonant of 
vagga groups respectively. 

Note: dutiya-the second becomes pathama (the first). 

catuttha-the fourth becomes tatiya (the third). 

The changed words are shown in bold, underlined. 


* ciccheda-(It was) cut. [wa] chida+a (Parokka vibhatti) [Here, the 
second “cha” changes into the first *c"] 

e bubhukkhati, ° babhüva, [Here, the fourth “bha” changes into the 
third *b"] 

* dadhati-(He) carries. [Here, the fourth “dha” changes into the third 
*q"] 


४६२, ४६७. HAM चवग्गो 

462, 467. Kavaggassa cavaggo. 
[Kavaggassatcavaggo. 2 words] 

[V] Abbhase vattamanassa kavaggassa cavaggo hoti. 


Those “abbhasa consonants” belonging to ka-vagga group 


are to be changed into ca-vagga group consonants. 
[Changed consonants are shown underlined] 


* Cikicchati-(He) cures. [wa] kita+cha+ti. 
[Here, “k” changes into *c"] 


e Jigucchati-(He) detests. [wa] gupa+cha+ti. 
[Here, “g” changes into “j”] 


^! Only by exactly knowing the initial word of the root and its position in the 
vagga will make the function of this Sutta easily understandable. 


647 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


e Jighacchati-(He) wants to eat. [wa] ghasat+chatti. 
[Here, “gha” changes into “]”] 
e Jigisati-(He) wants to carry. [wa] hara+sa+ti. 
[This is an anomalous example. First, the root “hara” changes into 


८८ 429 


gr" and “g” of it further changes into “]”] 
e Jangamati-(He) goes. [wa] gamutatti. 
[Here, “g” changes into *3"] 


e Cankamati. (He) paces up and down. [Wa] kamu+a+ti. 
[Here, “k” changes into *c"] 


४६३, 433. मानकितानं वतत्तं वा 
463, 532. Manakitanam va,ta-ttam va. 
[Manakitanam-va, ta-ttarh+va. 3 words] 
[V] Mana,kita-icce'tesam dhatünam abbhasagatanam 
vakara,takarattam hoti và yathasankhyam. 


Those *abbhasa consonants m and k" which are part of the 
roots “mana, kita”, sometimes change into consonants “v” 
and “t” respectively. (The duplicated abbhasa m of mana becomes 
“y” and k of the root kita becomes "t". See shown underlined below) 


e vimamsati-(He) investigates. ® tikicchati. 


Va’ti kimattharh? What is the word “va” for? 

To show that function of this Sutta is not always applied in 
some examples shown below as restricted by the word “va”. 
* cikicchati [Refer to 462]. 


४६४, ५०४. हस्स जो 

464, 504. Hassa jo. [Hassa+jo. 2 words] 

[V] Abbhase vattamanassa hakarassa jo hoti. 
The reduplicated abbhasa consonant “h” changes into “j” 
(The applied function shown in bold, underlined) 
e Jahati, [wa] ha+a+ti. 
e Juhvati-(He) sacrifices. [wa] hu+a+ 
e Juhoti-(He) sacrifices. [wa] hu+a+ti. 
e Jahara-(He had) carried. [wa] hara+a (Parokkha vibhatti, not an 

affix). 


1. 


ct 





648 


Akhyata Kappa 


४६५, ४६३. अन्तस्सिवण्णाकारो वा 


465, 463. Antassi’vanna’karo va. 
[1.Antassativanna, akarot+va. 3 words. 
2.Antassativannotakarot+va. 4 words. | 

[V] Abbhasassa antassa ivanno hoti, akaro va. 


The component vowels of abbhasa consonants sometimes 


८८५११ ex^ 6699 


changes into “i” or 
in bold, underlined) 


or a .(The applied functions are shown 


e Jigucchati, [Here, “u” of “gu” changes into *i"] 

* pivasati, [Here, “a” of ^pa" changes into “i”] 

® vimamsati, [Here, “a” of “ma” changes into “T’] 

e jighacchati, [Here, “a” of “gha” changes into “i” 

* babhüva, [Here, “i” of “bhi” changes into *a"] 

e dadhati. [Here, “a” of “dha” changes into “a”] [wa shown already] 


Va'ti kimattharh? What is the word “va” for? 
To show that function of this Sutta is not always applied in 


some examples as restricted by the word “va”. 
[Hence, there is no *babhukkhati", but “bubhukkhati”.] 
* bubhukkhati-(He) wants to eat. 


४६६, ४८९. निग्गहितञ्च 
466, 489. Niggahitaii' ca. [Niggahitam-ca. 2 words] 
[V] Abbhasassa ante niggahita'gamo hoti va. 


Sometimes, there has to come a “niggahita” by the end of 
an abbhasa consonant. [“by the end of" is a literal translation which 
means “after”. The applied "niggahita-m" is invisible except its derivat- 
ive morpheme “ñ” or “ñ” in its place shown in bold, underlined] 

* cankamati, 

e caficalati-(He) shakes, [wa] calat+a+ti. 

e jahgamati. 

Va'ti kimattham? What is the word “va” for? 

To show that function of this Sutta is not always applied in 


649 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 
some examples shown below as restricted by the word “va”. 
* Pivasati, * daddallati. 


४६७, 433. ततो पामानानं वामं ag 
467, 533. Tato pa,mananam và,mam sesu. 
[Tato+pa, mananarh+va, marntsesu. 4 words] 
[V] Tato abbhasato pa,m4na-icce’tesarh dhatünam va,marh- 
icce'te adesa honti yathasankhyam sapaccaye pare. 


When “sa” affix follows, the root pa and mana, located af- 
ter an abbhasa word, changes into “va” and mam" respec- 


tively [This Sutta changes Pa into Và and the root mana into mar. 
The applied functions are shown in bold, underlined] 


e pivasati, ° Vimamsati. 


४६८, ४९२. ठा RNA 
468, 492. Tha tittho. [Tha+tittho. 2 words] 
[V] Tha-icce’tassa dhatussa tittha’deso hoti va. 


The root word “tha” sometimes changes into "tittha". 
[The applied function is shown in bold] 

e titthati-(He) stands. [wa] tha+a+ti. 

e titthatu-(Let it) stand. [wa] tha+a+tu. 

e tittheyya-(He) should stand. [wa] tha+eyya. 

e tittheyyurh-(They) should stand. [wa] tha+eyyurm. 


Va’ ti kimattharh? What is the word “va” for? 

To show that function of this Sutta is not always applied in 
some examples shown below as restricted by the word “va”. 
* thati-(It) stands. [wa] tha+a+ti. 


Note: In Sutta 468, 469, the structures of verbs are so simple that some- 
times it may be unnecessary to apply an affix such as “a”. But, some 
teachers used to hold the strict view that there should be an affix of Kat- 
tu sense in it to signify the relevant voice. Even if the affix is applied, it 
has to be elided by Sutta 510. In WA of examples, some are shown with 
an affix and some are not. This is a delicate minor grammatical matter. 


However, the golden rule is that it makes a grammatical sense to have at 


650 


Akhyata Kappa 


least one appropriate affix even though without an affix, the applied 
vibhattis can still signify the voice (Refer to Suttas 453, 456). As such, 
in cases where the structure of the verb is so simple and does not re- 
quire any complex morphological procedure, it is still possible for such 
simple verbs without an affix. 


४६९, ४९४, ur पिवो 
469, 494. Pa pivo. [Pa+pivo. 2 words] 
[V] Pa-icce'tassa dhatussa piva'deso hoti va. 


The root “pa” sometimes changes into “piva”. 

[The applied function is shown in bold, underlined] 

e pivati-(He) drinks. [wa] pa+a+ti. 

e pivatu-(Let him) drink. [wa] pa-a-tu. 

e piveyya-(He) should drink. [wa] pat+eyya. 

e piveyyum. pl. [wa] pa*eyyum. 

Va'ti kimattharh? What is the word “va” for? 

To show that function of this Sutta is not always applied in 
some examples shown below as restricted by the word “va”. 
* pati-(He) drinks. [wa] pat+atti. 


४७०, ५१४. ITA जाजंना 
470, 514. Nassa jāj am,na. [Nassa+ja, jar, na. 2 words] 
[V] Na-icce'tassa dhatussa ja,jarh,na-adesa honti va. 
The root “fia” sometimes changes into “ja, jam, na". 
[The applied functions are shown underlined] 
[ja-function] ° Janati-(He) knows. [wa] ñā+nā+ti. 
e janeyya * janiya-(He) should know or he may know. 
[jarn-function] ® jafifia-(He) should know. [wa] ñā+nā+eyya 


(Please note that janeyya, janiya, jafifia all have the 
same WA). 
[na-function] * nàyati-(He) knows. [wa] ñā+nā+ti. 
Note: (1) “ja” function is applied only when “na” affix is applied after 
the root. 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


com a? 


(2) "jam" function is applied when “fia” morphological function 
is present behind (i.e. after this function has been done by Sutta 
508) 

(3) “na” function is applied when changing of affix “na” into “ya” 
is done by Sutta 509. 


४७१, ४८३. दिसस्स पस्सदिस्सदक्खा वा 
471, 483. Disassa passa,dissa,dakkha va. 
[Disassa+passa, dissa, dakkhat+va. 3 words] 
[V] Disa-icce'tassa dhatussa passa,dissa,dakkha-icce’te adesa 
honti và. 


The root “disa” sometimes changes into “passa, dissa, 
dakkha". [The applied functions are shown underlined] 


* passati, * dissati, * dakkhati-(He) sees. 
[wa] disa-*a-ti. (All three have the same wa) 
* adakkha-(He) saw. 
[wa] disat+a (A shortened Hiyyattani “a” vibhatti in the verb). 


Va'ti kimattham? What is the word “va” for? 
To show that function of this Sutta 1s not always applied in 
some instances shown below as restricted by the word “vā”. 


* addasa-(He) saw. [wa] disa+ā (A shortened Hiyyattani “a” 
vibhatti in the verb). 





४७२, ५३१. ब्यञ्जनन्तस्स चो छपच्चयेसु च 

472, 531. Byanjana’ntassa co chapaccayesu ca. 
[Byafijana-antassat+co+chapaccayesu+ca. 4 words] 

[V] Byafyana’ntassa dhatussa co hoti chapaccayesu paresu. 


The last component consonant of a root changes into “९9” 


when a “cha” affix follows. [The applied function “c” is shown in 
bold, underlined] 


(1) * jiguechati. (Here, the last consonant “p” of the root “gupa” 
changes into “c”’) 

(2) * tikiechati. (Here, the last consonant “t” of the root “kita” 
changes into “c”) 


652 


Akhyata Kappa 


(3) * jighacchati. (Here, the last consonant "s" of the root “ghasa” 
changes into “९”) [Refer to 434] 


४७३, ५२९.कोखेच 
473, 529. Ko khe ca. [Ko+khe+ca. 3 words] 
[V] Byafijana'ntassa dhatussa ko hoti khapaccaye pare. 


The last component consonant of the root changes into “ka” 

when a “kha” affix is applied after the root. 

[The applied function “k” is shown in bold, underlined] 

(1) * titikkhati. (Here, the last consonant “j” of the root “tija” 
changes into “k’’) 

(2) ° bubhukkhati. (Here, the last consonant “j” of the root “bhuja” 
changes into *k") [Re: 433-434] 


४७४, ५३५. हरस्स गी से 

474, 535. Harassa gi Se. [Harassat+gitse. 3 words] 

[V] Hara-icce’tassa dhatussa sabbasse’va gi-adeso hoti 
sapaccaye pare. 


The entire root “hara” changes into "gr" when an affix “sa” 
is applied after the root. 


[The applied function “छा” is shown in bold, underlined] 


* Jigisati-(He) wants to carry or to search. [This verb has other root 
such as “esa-to search”] [wa] hara or esat+sa+ti [Re: 434] 


४७५, ४६५. ब्रूभून माहभूवा परोक्खायं 
475, 465. Brü,bhü,na' maha,bhüvaà parokkhayam. 
[Brü, bhū, narh+aha, bhtiva+parokkhayam. 3 words] 
[V] Brü,bhü-icce'tesam dhatünam aha,bhüva-icce'te adesa 
honti yathasankhyam parokkhayam vibhattiyam. 


The root words “bru, bhū” changes into “aha, bhüva" re- 
spectively when Parokkha vibhattis are applied after them. 
[Brü»aha. Bhi>bhiiva. The applied functions shown underlined] 


653 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


e aha-(He) said. sl. [wa] brū+a (Parokkha vibhatti.) 

* ahu-(They) said. pl. [wa] brū+u (Parokkha vibhatti) 

e babhüva-(It) has been. sl. [wa] bhū+a (Parokkha vibhatti) 

e babhüvu-(they have been) pl. [wa] bhū+u (Parokkha vibhatti. No 
affixes) 

Parokkhaàya' miti kimattharh? 

What is the word *parokkhayam" for? 

To show that the example below is not a parokkha vibhatti. 

So, it is inapplicable. 

e abravurh-(they) said. [wa] brü-Fum (Ajjattani vibhatti. “a” is in- 

serted in front of the verb by Sutta 519 and meaningless) 


४७६, ४४२. गमिस्सन्तो च्छो वा सब्बासु 
476, 442. Gamissa’nto ccho và sabbasu. 
[Gamissat+anto+cchot+va+sabbasu. 5 words] 

[V] Gamu-icce'tassa dhatussa anto makaro ccho hoti và 
sabbasu paccaya,vibhattisu. 
The component consonant “m” of the root “gamu” some- 
times changes into “ech” in verbs of all vibhattis and affix- 
es. [The applied function “cch” is shown in bold, underlined] 


e gacchamano-(While he is) going. [wa] gamu+“‘at+mana”’+si. 
Note: This example has two affixes. Those inside the quotation mark 
* " are two affixes. 

e gacchanto-(While he is) going. [wa] gamu-anta-si. 


In each set of examples below, the second is inapplicable one. 
* gacchati, * gameti-(He) goes. (In second * example, affix “a” 
becomes “6” by Sutta 510) 
[wa] gamu+a+ti (Both are Vattamana vibhatti verbs, same WA). 
e gacchatu, * gametu-(Let him) go. (Here, “a” becomes “e” by 
510) 
[wa] gamut+a+tu (Both are Paficami vibhatti verbs, same WA). 
* gaccheyya. * gameyya-(He should) go. 
[wa] gamuteyya (Both are Sattami vibhatti verbs, the same WA). 
e agaccha, * agama-(He) has gone. 
[wa] gamu+a (Both Hiyyattani vibhatti verbs, the same WA, with 





654 


Akhyata Kappa 


no affix). 
e agacchi, * agami-(He) has gone. 
[wa] gamu-1 (Both Ajjattani vibhatti verbs, the same WA). 
* gacchissati, * gamissati-(He) will go. 
[wa] gamu-ssati (Both Bhavissanti vibhatti verbs, same WA). 
* agacchissa, * agamissa-(He might have) gone (actually he 
didn't). 
[wa] gamutssa (Both Kalatipatti vibhatti verbs, same WA). 





Gamisse'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “gamissa” for? 

To show that the example below is not of the root *gamu", 
but the other root word “isu”. So it is inapplicable. 

* icchati-(He) wants. [wa] isu+a+ti. 


४७७, ४७९. TART ज्जतनिम्हि मकारो ओ 
477, 479. Vacassa'jjatanimhi" makaro o. 
[Vacassatajjatanimhit+akaro+o. 4 words] 
[V] Vaca-icce'tassa dhatussa akaro otta’mapajjate ajjatanimhi 
vibhattimhi. 


The initial component vowel of the root *vaca" changes 
into “o” when an Ajjattani vibhatti is applied after the root. 
[The applied function is shown in bold, underlined] 


e avoca-(He) said. sl. [wa] vacat+a (Ajjatani attanopada vibhatti verb). 

e avocum-(They) said. pl. [wa] vaca--um (Ajjattani parassapada 
verb). 

Ajjatanimhr'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “ajjattanimhi” for? 

To show that examples below are not of “ajjattanT”, but of 

“Hiyyattant’. So, they are inapplicable. 

* avaca-(He) said. sl. [wa] vacat+a [vibhatti “a” is shortened] 

* avacü-(they) said. pl. [wa] vacatü 


655 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


४७८, ४३८. अकारो दीघं हिमिमेसु 

478, 438. Akaro digham hi,mi,mesu. 
[Akaro+dtghamthi, mi, mesu. 3 words] 

[V] Akaro digha' mapajjate hi,smi,ma-icce’tesu vibhattisu. 


When “hi, mi, ma" vibhattis are applied in a verb, the vow- 
el before them is to be made into a digha (i.e. lengthened). 
[^mhe" vibhatti is also applicable for the function of this Sutta. The ap- 
plied function is shown in bold, underlined] 

e gacchahi-(You) go. [wa] gamut+athi 

e gacchami-(I) go. [wa] gamut+at+mi 

e gacchama-(We) go. [wa] gamu+at+ma 

e gacchamhe-(We) go. [wa] gamut+a+mhe 





Mikaraggahanena hivibhattimhi akaro kvaci na 
digha'màpajjate. 

By means of “mi” in Sutta, the digha procedure is inappli- 
cable in some words (even if “hi” is applied). 

* gacchahi-(You) go. [wa] gamut+athi 


४७९, ४५२. हि लोपं वा 
479, 452. Hi lopam va. [Hi+loparh+va. 3 words] 
[V] Hivibhatti lopa’mapajjate va. 


The “hi” vibhatti (belonging to paficami vibhatti group) is 

sometimes elided. 

[Only the first is applied example. The second is inapplicable in each 

set.] 

e gaccha, * gacchahi-(You) go. [wa] gamut+athi 

० gama, * gamahi-(You) go. [wa] gamutathi (wa of both set of 
examples are the same) 

* gamaya, * gamayahi-(You causes to) go. (You prompt him to go. 
Causative verbs). [wa] gamu+nayathi 

Hr ti kimattham? 

What is the word “hi” for? 

To show that examples shown below are not of “hi”, but of 


656 


Akhyata Kappa 


“ti”. So they are inapplicable. 
* gacchati-(He) goes. [wa] gamu+a+ti 
* gamayati-(He causes to) go. [wa] gamu+naya+ti 


४८०, ४९०. होतिस्सरे होहे भविस्सन्तिम्हि स्सस्स च 


480, 490. Hotissare’ho’he’ bhavissantimhi ssassa ca. 
[Hotissaro--eha, oha, e+bhavissantimhi+ssassat+ca. 5 words] 
[V] Hü-icce'tassa dhatussa saro eha,oha,e-tta’mapajjate 
bhavissantimhi, ssassa ca lopo hoti va. 


=) 


The component vowel **ü" of the root word “hū” some- 
times changes into “eha, oha, e” when bhavissanti vibhatti 
is applied after the root. Besides, the component consonants 


“ss” of the vibhatti are also elided. [Two functions] 
In three set of examples below, all two functions are applied. Shown in 


bold, underlined. 
[eh] * hehiti-(It) will be. [wa] hū+ssati 

e hehinti-(They) will be. pl. [wa] hü-ssanti 
[oh] ° hohiti, [wa] hü-ssati ° hohinti, pl. [wa] hü*ssanti 
[e] ° heti, [wa] hü-*ssati ® henti, pl. [wa] hü-ssanti 
In three set of examples below, only the first function is applied. 
Eliding of “ss”, the second function, is not applied. 
[eh] * hehissati, [wa] hü-ssati ° hehissanti, pl. [wa] hü-ssanti 
[oh] ° hohissati,[wa] hū+ssati ° hohissanti, pl. [wa] hü-ssanti 
[e] ° hessati, [wa] hü-ssati ® hessanti. pl. [wa] hü*ssanti 
Note: No affix in these examples though there can be an “a” affix ap- 
plicable. There will be an “i” to be inserted before vibhatti which ren- 
ders any extra vowel unnecessary to complete the word. 
Hü'ti kimattharn? What is the word “hū” for? 
To show that the examples below are not of the root word 
*hü", but of “bhū”. So, they are inapplicable. 
* bhavissati-(It) will be. [wa] bhü-ssati 
* bhavissanti-(they) will be. pl. [wa] bhü-ssanti 


Bhavissantimhr ti kimattham? 
What is the word “bhavissantimhi” for? 


657 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


To show that the example below is not of *bhavissanti", but 
of *vattamana-ti". So, it is inapplicable. 
* hoti-(It) is. [wa] hū+a+ti 


४८१, ५२४. करस्स सपच्चयस्स काहो 
481, 524. Karassa sapaccayassa kaho. 
[Karassa-sa-paccayassa-tkaho. 3 words] 
[V] Kara-icce' tassa dhatussa sapaccayassa kaha'deso hoti va 
bhavissantimhi vibhattimhi, ssassa ca niccam lopo hoti. 


When a bhavissanti is applied, the root “kara”, along with 
the component consonant “ss” of the applied vibhatti, 
sometimes changes into “kaha”. Besides, the component 
consonants “ss” of the vibhatti are always elided. 

[Applied functions are shown in bold, underlined. ] 


° kahati, ° kahiti-(He) will do. [wa] karat+atssati (Both are the 
same) 

° kahasi, ° kahisi-(You) will do. [wa] karat+atssasi (Both are 
the same) 

e kahaàmi-(1) will do. [wa] kara+at+ssami 

e kahama-(We) will do. [wa] karatat+ssama 


Va'ti kimattharh? What is the word “va” for? 

To show that function of this Sutta is not always applied in 
some examples shown below as restricted by the word “va”. 
* karissati-(He) will do. [wa] karat+a+ssati 

* karissanti-(They) will do. [wa] karat+a+ssanti 





Sapaccayaggahanena afifiehi’pi bhavissantiya vibhattiya 
khami,khama,chami,chama-icca' dayo adesa honti. 
By means of the word “sapaccaya” in Sutta, the “ssami, 
ssama" of bhavissanti vibhatti applied after other roots, can 
also change into “khami, khama, chami, chama” respec- 
tively. [Functions are shown underlined] 
(1) ° vakkhàmi-(1) will say. [wa] vacat+at+ssami 

e vakkhama-(We) will say. [Wa] vacat+at+ssama 


658 


Akhyata Kappa 


Note: The last consonant “c” of the root changes into “k” by Sutta 
473 in these examples and later combined it to next “kh”. 
(2) ° vacchàmi-(I) will stay. [wa] vasat+a+ssami 
e vacchama-(We) will stay. [wa] vasata+ssama 
Note: The last consonant “s” of the root changes into “c” by Sutta 472 
in these examples. It is later combined to next “ch” to become a com- 
plete word. 


Iti akhyatakappe tatiyo kando. 
The Third Section of Akhyata Verb ends. 


659 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


Catuttha Kanda 
The Fourth Section 


४८२, ५०८. दादन्तस्सं मिमेसु 
482, 508. Da’dantassa’m mi, mesu. 
[Da-antassat+arn+mi, mesu. 3 words] 
[V] Da-icce'tassa dhatussa antassa am hoti mi,ma-icce’tesu. 


The component vowel “a” of the root “da” changes into 
"am" when “mi, ma" vibhattis are applied after it. [See the 
function shown underlined below] 


e dammi-(1) give. [wa] da+mi 
e damma-(We) give. [wa] da+ma 
Note: The applied “mh” becomes ordinary “m” by the rule of sutta 31. 


660 


Akhyata Kappa 


४८३, ५२७. असंयोगन्तस्स वुद्धि कारिते 
483, 527. Asamyoga'ntassa vuddhi* karite. 


[Asamyogantassa+vuddhitkarite. 3 words] 
[V] Asarhyoga’ntassa’S dhatussa karite vuddhi hoti. 


The component vowel of non-conjunct root undergoes the 
process of *vuddhi" in verbs where causative affixes are 
applied after them. [The applied vuddhi vowels are shown in bold] 


० kareti-(He) causes to do. * karenti-(They) cause to do. 
* karayati, * karayanti, 

* karapeti, * karapenti, 

* karapayati, * karapayanti. [Refer to Sutta 438] 


Asamyoga'ntasse'ti kimattham? 
What is the word *asamyogantassa" for? 
To show that the examples shown below are not 


^WVuddhi means an increase in the metrical nature of the word. Through this 
procedure, “a” changes into changes into changes into 
This may seems like similar to “dtgha-the lengthening process" of rassa i.e. 
short vowels. But it is somewhat different in terms of how it takes place. In 
addition, “i” and “T” changes into “e”, while “u & a” changes into “o”. This 
process of morphing into another different vowel form is called 
*vuddhi". Furthermore, “e” becomes either “aya” or “aya” while “o” also 
becomes “ava” or “ava” by means of another follow-up procedure called 
*anuvuddhi" (anu-means following, i.e. a follow-up procedure after vuddhi 
has been applied in some words). All three Suttas from 483, 484, 485, per- 
form vuddhi function. Only 483-485 have a wider application while Sutta 
484 is confined to only a few roots in its function. 

40 “Asarhyoganta” means ending in non-conjunct. [A-not, sarhyoga-being 
well-joined in a cluster of words, i.e. conjunct, anta-ending] The conjunct- 
consonants are clearly noticeable in the oriental Asian scripts which used to 
be written in vertical order in the languages such as Devanagari and Burmese 
etc. In the Romanized Pali which used to be written in horizontal mode, it 
may not be easily noticeable. However, when double, vowel-less consonants 
of similar or dissimilar shape are present in the root, it can be easily as- 
sumed as “sarhyoganta dhatu (the conjunct-ending root)”. 


6८2११ ८८५११ 6९८०१ 6६७३११ 6८८३६११ 


ea 


661 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


“asarnyoganta-single consonant words", but *samyoganta- 
conjunct-consonants words". So, they are inapplicable. (See 
conjuncts in the verbs shown in bold, underlined) 

* Cintayati-(he) thinks. * mantayati-(he) consults or calls. [Refer 
to Sutta 452 ] 


४८४, ५४२. घटादीनं वा 

484, 542. Ghata’dinam va. [Ghața-ādīnam+vā. 2 words] 

[V] Ghata'dinam dhatiinarh asamyoga'ntanam vuddhi hoti va 
karite. 


The component vowel of the non-conjunct root “ghata” etc. 
sometimes undergoes the process of *vuddhi" when fol- 
lowed by a causative affix. 


[The applied vuddhi vowels are shown in bold. The second example in 
each pair is inapplicable] 


e ghateti, * ghateti-(He) causes to make effort. [wa] ghata+ne+ti 
e ghatayati,* ghatayati. [wa] ghatatnaya+ti 

e ghatapeti, * ghatapeti. [wa] ghata+nape+ti 

e ghatapayati, * ghatapayati. [wa] ghata+napayatti 

e gameti, * gameti-(He) causes to go. [wa] gamu+ne+ti 

e gamayati, * gamayati. [wa] gamu+naya+ti 
e gamapeti, * gamapeti. [wa] gamu+napetti 
e gamapayati, * gamapayati. [wa] gamut+napaya+ti 


Ghatadina' miti kimattham? 

What is the word “ghatadinath” for? 

To show that the example below is inapplicable as it is not 
the root “ghata”, but “kara”. 

* kareti. 














662 


Akhyata Kappa 


४८५, ४३४. अञ्जेसु च 
485, 434. Afifiesu ca. [Afifiesu*ca. 2 words] 


[V] Afifesu ca paccayesu sabbesam dhatünam 
asamyoga'ntanam vuddhi hoti. 


The component vowel of non-conjunct roots usually under- 
goes the process of *vuddhi" in verbs when other non- 


causative affixes and vibhattis follow. [The result of applied 
point of vuddhi are shown underlined] 


e jayati-(He) conquers. ® hoti, [wa] hū+a+ti * bhavati. [Refer to 
Sutta 445] 
Caggahanena nu-paccayassa’pi vuddhi hoti. 


By the word “ca”, the affix “nu” can become a vuddhi, (i.e. 
the component vowel “u” of the affix changes into *o".) 

[See “०” in the example shown in bold, underlined] 

* abhisunoti-(He) listens. [Refer to Sutta 448] 


४८६, ५४३. गुहदुसानं दीघं 
486, 543. Guha,dusanam digham. 
[Guha, dusanam-digham. 2 words] 

[V] Guha,dusa-icce’tesarn dhatünam saro digha’mapajjate 
karite. 
The component vowel “u” of root words “guha, dusa” 
changes into a digha “0” when causative affixes are applied 
after them. [See the applied digha vowels shown in bold] 


e gühayati-(It) causes to protect, hides. [wa] guha+naya+ti 
e düsayati-(he) causes to spoil. [wa] dusa*naya-ti 


663 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


४८७, ४७८. वचवसवहादीन मुकारो वस्स ये 
487, 478. Vaca,vasa,vaha' dina! mukaro vassa ye. 
[Vaca, vasa, vaha-adinarnt+ukaro+vassatye. 4 words] 
[V] Vaca,vasa,vaha-icce'va' madinam dhatünam vakarassa 
ukaro hoti yapaccaye pare. 


The component vowel “a” and sometimes consonant “v” of 
the roots “vaca, vasa, vaha” changes into “u” when a “ya” 
affix follows, (i.e. is present in the verb). 


6c 05. 


Note: Two ways of changing into “u”: in the first example, the whole 


6699 


“va” changes into “u”. In the rest, only “a” of “va” changes into “u”. 
The applied vowel “0” is shown in bold, underlined. 


e uccate, [wa] vacatyatte [Here, “va” changes into *u"] 


e vuccati, [wa] vaca+ya+te [Refer to Sutta 441, both are the 
same] 


e vussati-(has) stayed. [wa] vasatya+te 
* vuyhati-(It is) carried away (as in river currents). 
[wa] vahat+yatte 


४८८, ४८१. ह विपरिययो लो वा 
488, 481. Ha vipariyayo? lo va. 


[Ha-vipariyayotlo-va. 3 words] 
[V] Hakarassa vipariyayo hoti yapaccaye pare, 
yapaccayassa ca lo hoti và. 


In the roots such as “vaha” etc. with “ya” affix being ap- 
plied after it, the consonants “h (of the root)" and “y (of the af- 
fix)" are to be reversed in their positions (1.6. y of the affix 
“ya” moved to front. Hence, it looks like “yha’’). In addi- 
tion, “ya” changes into “la” in some instances of verbs. 
[The words being reversed are shown in bold, underlined] 


^7 Vipariyaya means reversing the position of two letters from back to forth 
and vice versa. It is one form of grammatical procedure in the morphology. 
[Vi-specially+pari-being reversedt+aya-happening | 


664 


Akhyata Kappa 


* vulhati, 

* vuyhati-(It is) carried away (as by river currents, same meaning). 
[wa] vahat+yatte 

Note: In first example, the affix “y” becomes “I” after reversal. 

In the second, only *h" and “9” are reversed. 


४८९, ५१९. गहस्स घे प्पे 

489, 519. Gahassa ghe ppe. [Gahassa*ghe-*ppe. 3 words] 

[V] Gaha-icce'tassa dhatussa sabbassa ghekaro hoti 
ppa-paccaye pare. 
The entire root “gaha” changes into *ghe" when the affix 
“ppa” is applied after the root. [See the applied function shown 
underlined] 


* gheppati-(he) takes. [Refer to Sutta 450] 


४९०, ५१८. हलोपो vere 

490, 518. Halopo nhamhi. [Halopo+nhamhi. 2 words] 

[V] Gaha-icce’tassa dhatussa hakarassa lopo hoti nha-mhi 
paccaye pare. 


The consonant “ha” of the root word “gaha” is elided when 


the affix “nha” follows it. [See only “ga” with the elided “ha” of 
the root “gaha” no longer visible, which is shown underlined. ] 


* ganhati-(he) takes. [Refer to Sutta 450] 


४९१, ५२३. करस्स कासत्तमज्जतनिम्हि 
491, 523. Karassa kasatta' majjatanimhi. 
[Karassat+kasattarh+ajjatanimhi. 3 words] 
[V] Kara-icce'tassa dhatussa sabbassa kasattam hoti va 
ajjatanimhi vibhattimhi. 


The entire root word “kara” sometimes changes into 


"Kasa" in verbs when an ajjattani vibhatti is applied. 
[The applied function *kasa" is shown in bold, underlined] 


665 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


e akasi-(he) did. [wa] karat 
e akasum-(they) did. [wa] karat+urm 
* akari-(he) did. [wa] karat+i 
* akarurh-(they) did. [wa] kara--ur (These are inapplicable examples) 


= 





= 





Kasatta’mitibhavaniddesena afifiattha’pi sa’ gamo hoti. 


By using the bhava-taddhita expression “kasattarh”’, an “s” 
is to be inserted (before the vibhatti) applied after other 
roots rather than the root “kara”. [The applied function "s" is 
shown in bold, underlined. The vibhatti “T’ is shortened] 

e Ahosi-(It) was. [wa] hū+Ħ ® adasi-(he) gave. [wa] dad 


४९२, ४९९, असस्मा मिमानं मिम्हान्तलोपो च 
492, 499. Asasma mi,ma,nam mhimha’ntalopo ca. 
[Asasma--mi, ma, narn+mhi, mhat+antalopo+ca. 5 words] 
[V] Asa-icce'taya dhatuya mi,ma, icce'tesam vibhattinam 
mhi,mha’desa honti và, dhatva'ntassa lopo ca. 


The vibhattis *mi, ma" applied after the root word *asa" 
sometimes changes into “mhi, mha” respectively. In addi- 
tion, the component consonant "s" of the root is also elided. 
[Two functions. See applied function *mhi" “mha” shown underlined.] 
e amhi-(I) am. [wa] asa+mi ® amha-(we) are. [wa] asat+ma 

* asmi-(I) am. [wa] asat+mi * asma-(we) are. [wa] asa*-ma 








४९३, ४९८. थस्स त्थत्तं 
493, 498. Thassa tthattam. [Thassa+tthattarh. 2 words] 


[V] Asa-icce’taya dhatuya thassa vibhattissa tthattam hoti, 
dhatva'ntassa lopo ca. 


The vibhatti “tha” applied after the root word “asa” some- 
times changes into “ttha”. Besides, the component conso- 
nant “5” of the root is also elided. 

[Two functions. See the applied function “ttha” shown underlined] 


e attha-(you, pl) are. [wa] asat+tha 


666 


Akhyata Kappa 


४९४, ४९५. तिस्स feri 
494, 495. Tissa tthittam. [Tissa+tthittarn. 2 words] 


[V] Asa-icce'taya dhatuya tissa vibhattissa tthittarh hoti, 
dhatva’ntassa lopo ca. 


The vibhatti “ti” applied after the root word “asa” some- 
times changes into “tthi”. Besides, the component conso- 


ee 0? 


nant “5” of the root is also elided. 
(See the applied function “tthi” shown underlined). 


e atthi-(There) is. [wa] asa+ti 


४९५, ५००. तुस्स त्थुत्तं 

495, 500. Tussa tthuttam. [Tussa+tthuttarh. 2 words] 

[V] Asa-icce’taya dhatuya tussa vibhattissa tthuttam hoti, 
dhatva'ntassa lopo ca. 


The vibhatti “tu” applied after the root “asa” sometimes 
changes into “tthu” . In addition, the component consonant 


“s” of the root is also elided. 
[See the applied function “tthu” shown underlined.] 


e atthu-(Let it) be, (may) it be. [wa] asattu 


४९६, ४९७. सिम्हि च 
496, 497. Simhi ca. [Simhi+ca. 2 words] 
[V] Asasse'va dhatussa simhi vibhattimhi antassa lopo ca hoti. 


The component consonant "s" of the root word “asa” is 
elided when “si” vibhatti is applied after the root. (The ap- 


plied function is understandable only through morphological proce- 
dure.) 


ko nu tva’masi marisa? 

ko-who. nu-? tva’masi [tvam-asi] tvam-you. * asi-(you) are. 
marisa-friend, i.e. Friend, who are you? [wa] asat+si 

Note: “nu” is a nipata particle equal to a question mark “?”. It is used 


to be syntactically related to the verb. Here, it is related to the verb 
“asitnu” which can be translated as “are you?". 


667 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


४९७, ४७७. लभस्मा ईईंनं त्थत्थं 
497, 477. Labhasma rimnam ttha,ttham. 
[LabhasmaH, irhnarh+ttha, ttharh. 3 words] 
[V] Labha-icce’taya dhatuya nimnam vibhattinam 
ttha,ttham-adesa honti, dhatva’ntassa lopo ca. 


The ajjattani vibhattis ‘1, im" applied after the root *Iabha" 
respectively changes into “ttha, ttharh”. Additionally, the 


component consonant “bh” of the root is also elided. 
[Two functions. See the applied functions “ttha” “ttharh” shown un- 


derlined.] 
e alattha-(he) got, obtained. [wa] labha+1 
* alattham-(I) got, obtained. [wa] labha+ith 


४९८, ४८०. कुसस्मा दी च्छि 

498, 480. Kusasma'di cchi. [Kusasma+i+cchi. 3 words] 

[V] Kusa-icce’taya dhatuya t-vibhattissa cchi hoti, 
dhatva’ntassa lopo ca. 


The ajjattani vibhatti "r^ applied after the root word “kusa” 
changes into “cchi” and the component consonant “sa” of 
the root is also elided. 
[Two functions. See applied function “echi” shown underlined] 
* akkocchi-(He) reviled (by saying abusive words etc). 

[wa] kusa-1 


४९९, ५०७. दा धातुस्स दज्जं 
499, 507. Dadhatussa dajj am. [Da-dhatussa+dajjarh. 2 words] 
[V] Da-icce'tassa dhatussa sabbassa dajja’deso hoti va. 


The whole “da” of the root “da” sometimes changes into 
"dajja". [See the applied function of “dajja” shown underlined.] 


e dajjami-(I) give. [wa] da+at+mi 
* dajjeyya-(he) should give. [wa] da+eyya 


668 


Akhyata Kappa 


* dadami-(1) give. [wa] da+a+mi 
* dadeyya-(he) should give. [wa] da+eyya (Inapplicable examples) 


५००, ४८६. वदस्स वज्जं 
500, 486. Vadassa vajjam. [Vadassatvajjarh. 2 words] 
[V] Vada-icce'tassa dhatussa sabbassa vajja'deso hoti va. 


The entire root “vada” sometimes changes into “vajja”. 
[See applied function *vajja" shown underlined. The second pair 1s in- 
applicable] 


e vajjami-(I) say. [wa] vadat+a+mi 
e vajjeyya-(he) should say. [wa] vadat+eyya 
* vadami-(I) say. [wa] vada*a*mi 
* vadeyya-(he) should say. [wa] vada*eyya 


५०१, ४४३. गमिस्स घम्मं 
501, 443. Gamissa ghammam. [Gamissat+ghammarh. 2 words] 
[V] Gamu-icce’tassa dhatussa sabbassa ghamma'deso hoti va. 


The entire root “gamu” sometimes changes into “gham- 
ma”. [See the applied function *ghamma" shown underlined.] 


* ghammatu-(let him) go. [wa] gamu+a+tu 

e ghammahi-(you) go. [wa] gamu+athi 

e ghammami-(I) go. [wa] gamut+at+mi 

Note: These ghamma-function applied verbs are seldom found in the 
canonical texts. 

Va'ti kimattham? What is the word “va” for? 

To show that the function of Sutta is not applied as restrict- 
ed by the word “va” in the examples below. 

* gacchatu-(let him) go. * gacchahi-(you) go. 

* gacchami-(I) go. [WA as shown above] 


669 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


५०२, ४९३. यम्हि दाधामाठाहापामहमथादीन मी 
502, 493. Yamhi da,dha,ma,tha,ha,pa,maha, 
matha’dina’ mi. 
[Yamhi-da, dha, ma, tha, ha, pa, maha, matha-adinarn1. 
3 words] 
[V] Yamhi paccaye pare da,dha,ma,tha,ha,pa,maha,matha- 
icce'va'madinam dhatünam anto 1-kara’mapajjate. 
The component vowel of the roots “da, dha, ma, tha, ha, 
pa, maha, matha” etc, changes into "T" when a “ya” affix 
is applied after the roots. [See the applied function "Y" shown in 
bold in front of *ya" affix. This affix is applicable by Sutta 440 only, 
not by 447. As such, these verbs are only in Kamma, Bhàva senses and 
voices. However, verbs of active voice prefixed with some upasagga 
and structured in this pattern are sometimes found in the Pali texts. 
e.g. Ohryati-(he) loses. Niltyati-(he) hides. Pidhtyati-(It) blocks] 
e diyati-(It is) given. [wa] dat+yatte 
e dhiyati-(It is) carried. [wa] dha+ya+te 
e miyati-(It is) measured. [wa] ma+ya+te 
e thiyati-(It is) stood. [wa] tha+yatte 
e hiyati-(It is) abandoned. [wa] hatya+te 
e plyati-(It is) drunk. [wa] patya-te 
e mahtyati-(It is) honored. [wa] mahatya+te 
e mathtyati-(It is) churned. [wa] mathatya+te 





५०३, ४८५. यजस्सादिस्पि 

503, 485. Yaj assa' dissi’. [Yajassatadissat+i. 3 words] 

[V] Yaja-icce'tassa dhatussa adissa i-karadeso hoti yapaccaye 
pare. 


6८५११ 
1 


The initial *ya" of the root word *yaja" changes into 
when a “ya” affix is applied after it. [See the applied function 


८८५११ 


i" shown in bold. One "j" is augmented] 


* ijjate-(is) worshiped. maya-by me. Buddho-Buddha, i.e. Buddha 
is worshipped by me (Passive voice verb). [wa] yaja+yatte 


670 


Akhyata Kappa 


५०४, ४७०. सब्बतो d इसु 
504, 470. Sabbato um imsu. [Sabbatot+urh+imsu. 3 words] 
[V] Sabbehi dhatthi um-vibhattissa imisuadeso hoti. 


An ajjattani vibhatti *um" applied after the roots of all 


verbs, changes into “isu”. [See the applied function “irhsu” shown 
underlined.] 


* upasankamimsu-(they) approached, came near. 


[wa] upaVsarinVkamutum. 
° nisidirhsu-(they) sat. [wa] niVsada-ur. 


५०५, ४८२. जरमरानं जीरजिय्यमिय्या वा 
505, 482. Jara,marananm jira,jiyya,miyya va. 


[Jara, marānarh+jīra, jiyya, miyya+va. 3 words] 


[V] Jara,mara-icce'tesam dhatünam jira,jiyya,miyya’desa 


honti và. 


The root words “jara, mara" sometimes changes into “jira, 
jiyya, miyya”. 


Note: The root “jara” changes into “jira, jiyya" and the root “mara” 
changes into “miyya”. 


[jira-function] * jirati-(he) gets old. [wa] jarata+ti. 
e jiranti-(they) get old. [wa] jarata+anti. 
[jiyya-function] ® jiyyati-(he) gets old. ® jiyyanti-(they) get old 
[WA same as before] 

[miyya-function] ° miyyati-(he) dies. [wa] maratat+ti. 

e miyyanti-(they) die. [wa] mara-a-anti. 

* marati-(he) dies. * maranti-(they) die. 
[The last two are inapplicable examples as restricted by “va’’] 





671 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


५०६, ४९६. सब्बत्था सस्सादिलोपो च 
506, 496. Sabbattha’sassa’dilopo ca. 
[Sabbatthat+asassa+adilopotca. 4 words] 
[V] Sabbattha vibhatti, paccayesu asa-icce'tassa dhatussa 
adissa lopo hoti và. 


In instances of all vibhattis and affixes, the initial vowel “a” 


of the root “asa” is sometimes elided. 
[The function is clearly noticeable as there is no more “a” of the root 
“asa”. These examples are widely found in the Pali texts.] 


e Siyà-(It) should be. [wa] asa-*eyya. 
e santi-(There) are. [wa] asat+atanti. 
* sante-(while it) is being, that being so. kv. 
[wa] asat+antat+smim [smith became "e". 
* samano-(while it) is, if being so. kv. 
[wa] asat+“‘at+mana’’+si [si became *o"]. 
Note: Both Sante and Samano are auxiliary Kita-verbs with multiple- 
uses. They are frequently used as present participle or cls or adv or 
adj. 
Va'ti kimattham? 
What is the word “va” for? 
To show that the function of Sutta is not applied as restrict- 
ed by the word “va”. 
* asi-(you) are. [wa] asatsi. (See Sutta 496) 





५०७, ५०१. असब्बधातुके भू 
507, 501. Asabbadhatuke bhū. [Asabbadhatuke+bhi. 2 words] 
[V] Asasse’va dhatussa bhü hoti va asabbadhatuke. 


The whole root “asa” sometimes changes into “bhū” in 
verbs where asabbadhatuka vibhattis are applied. (The applied 
function can be seen in the same form of verbs structured with the root 
"bhü". This is the only injunction in the grammar where a root is 
changed into the verb-form of the other root “bhū” in instances of verbs 
with Asabbadhatuka-terminations.) 


672 


Akhyata Kappa 


e bhavissati-(it) will be. [wa] asatatssati. 
e bhavissanti-(they) will be. [wa] asat+atssanti. 


Va’ ti kimattharh? What is the word “va” for? 

To show that the function of Sutta is not applied as restrict- 
ed by the word “va” 

* asum-(they) were. [wa] asat+urh. 


५०८, ५१५. एय्यस्स जातो इयाञा 
508, 515. Eyyassa fiato iya,na. 
[Eyyassatfatotiya, fia. 3 words] 
[V] Eyyassa vibhattissa fa-icce’ taya dhatuya parassa iya,fia- 
adesa honti và. 


A Sattami vibhatti *eyya" applied after the root word "fia" 
sometimes changes into “iya, fia". 


a? 


[The applied functions “iya” and “iia” are shown underlined]. 


e janiya, ° jafifià-(he) should know or it should be known. [One “fi” 
is augmented in the second example. Refer to Sutta 470] 

Va'ti kimattharn? What is the word “va” for? 

To show that the function of Sutta is not applied in the ex- 

ample below as being restricted by the word “va 

* janeyya-(he) should know. [Refer to Sutta 470] 


५०९, ५१६. नास्स लोपो यकारत्तं 
509, 516. Nassa lopo yakarattam. 
[Nassatlopo-tyakarattam. 3 words] 
[V] Na-icce'taya dhatuyà parassa napaccayassa lopo hoti và, 
yakarattafi'ca. 


The affix “na” applied after the root word “fia” is elided. 
Sometimes, the affix “na” changes into “ya”. [Two functions, 
one function for each example below] 

e jaiifia-(He) should know. [Eliding of affix “na” is applied] 


e nàyati-(He) knows. [Changing of the affix “na” into “ya” is applied. 
Refer to Sutta 470] 


673 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


Va’ ti kimattharh? What is the word “va” for? 

To show that the function of Sutta is not applied as being 
restricted by the word “va 

* janati-(he) knows. 


५१०, ४८७. लोपञ्चेत्त मकारो 
510, 487. Lopan’ce’tta’makaro. 


[Loparn+ca+ettarnt+akaro. 4 words] 
[V] Akarapaccayo lopa’mapajjate, ettafi’ca hoti va. 
The affix *a" (per Sutta 445) is sometimes either elided or if 


66,99 


unelided, it changes into an “e 
[This Sutta changes the affix “a” into “e” sometimes or elides it in most 
cases of *Bhü-group" verbs. ] 
e vajjemi, ° vademi-(1) say. [Here, “a” changes into “e”. See “e” 
shown in bold, underlined] 
e vajjami, ° vadami-(I) say. [Here, “a” is lengthened into “a”] 
[wa] vada+a+mi [Refer to Sutta 500] 


५११, ५२१. उत्त मोकारो 

511, 521. Utta’mokaro. [Uttarntokaro. 2 words] 

[V] Okarapaccayo utta’mapajjate va. 
The affix “o” applied after the root word “kara” sometimes 
changes into “u”. [See the applied “u” function shown in bold, un- 
derlined in the first example. The second is inapplicable one] 
e kurute-(He) does. [wa] kara+o+te. 
* karoti-(He) does. [wa] kara*o-ti. 
Okaro'ti kimattham? What is the word “okaro” for? 
To show that here “o” means an affix, not a *vuddhi mor- 
pheme o" as shown in the example below. Hence, it is inap- 
plicable here. 
* hoti. [wa] hū+a+ti. 


674 


Akhyata Kappa 


५१२, 433. करस्साकारो च 
512, 522. Karassa’karo ca. [Karassa+akaro+ca. 3 words] 
[V] Kara-icce’tassa dhatussa akaro utta’mapajjate va. 


The component vowel “a” of “ka” in the root word “kara”, 
sometimes changes into “0”. [See the applied *u" function shown 
in bold, underlined in the two examples] 


* kurute, * karoti. [WA shown in the preceding Sutta] 


e kubbanti-(they) do. [wa] kara+o+anti. 

Note: Morphological procedure: 1. Change the affix “o” into “u” by 511 
[kar*u-anti]. 2. Change a of kar into u by this 512 [kurt+utanti] 3. Delete “r” 
by 517 [ku+u+anti]. 4. Change the second “u” into “v” by 18 [ku*v-anti] 

5. Add one more “v” by 28 [ku+wv+anti]. 6. Change “vv” into “bb” by “ca” of 
20 [kubbanti]. “Kurute” can be easily completed by the functions of 511-512. 





* kayirati-(he) does. [wa] karat+yira+ti. 

Karasse'ti kimattham? What is the word “karassa” for? 

To show that the examples below are not of the root “kara”, 
but of the root “sara & mara”. So, they are inapplicable. 

* sarati-(he) remembers. [wa] saratattt. 

* marati-(he) dies. [wa] mara+a+ti. 


५१३, ४३५. ओ अव सरे 
5 13, 435. O ava sare. [O+ava+sare. 3 words] 
[V] Okarassa dhatva’ntassa sare pare ava’deso hoti. 


6699 


A vuddhi morpheme (of root words such as “cu, bhü 

etc.) changes into “ava” when a vowel follows it [*a vowel 

follows it” here means the affix “a’’] 

Note: “o” is a morpheme derivative of vuddhi procedure performed on 
ü" of the roots “cu, bhū”. See the applied function shown in bold, 

underlined. 

e cavati-(It) moves or dies. [wa] cu+a+ti. 

e bhavati-(It) is. [wa] bhū+a+ti. 

O'ti kimattharh? What is the word “o” for? 

To show that in the example below, there is no “0”, but on- 


675 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


ly a vuddhi morpheme “6”, So it is inapplicable here. 
* jayati-(he) conquers. [wa] jitatti. 


५१४, ४९१. U अय 
514, 49]. E aya. [Etaya. 2 words] 


[V] Ekarassa dhatva’ntassa sare pare aya’deso hoti. 


A vuddhi morpheme “e” (of root words such as “ni, ji" etc) 
changes into “aya” when a vowel follows.[ i.e. present behind 


in a verb. See the applied function shown in bold, underlined] 
Note: “0” is a morpheme derivative of vuddhi procedure performed on 


“kT? of the roots “ji and nī “. See the applied function shown in bold, 
underlined. 


e nayati-(he) carries. [wa] nī+a+ti. * jayati. [wa] jitatti. 


५१५, ५४१. ते आवाया कारिते 
51 5, 541. Te ava'ya karite. [Te+āva, ayatkarite. 3 words] 
[V] Te o,e-icce'te ava,aya' dese papunanti karite. 


6699 z 


Those vowels “o” and “e” respectively change into *ava' 
and *aya" when a causative affix follows. [See the applied 


ea 


functions of “āva” and “aya” shown in bold, underlined] 

Note: “0” and “e” are morpheme derivatives of vuddhi procedure per- 
formed on “फा” of the roots “lu” and nr". See the applied function 
shown in bold, underlined. 

e Jàveti-(he) causes to cut. [wa] lūtņe+ti. 

e nàyeti-(he) causes to carry. [wa] nr*ne-ti. 

Yogavibhagena afifiasmim’pi ekarassa aya'deso hoti. 

By means of yogavibhaga procedure, the component vowel 
“e” changes into “aya” in verbs where a non-causative affix 
is applied. [See the applied function shown in bold, underlined] 


e gayati-(he) sings. [wa] get+a+ti. 

e gayanti-(they) sing. [wa] get+atanti. 

Note: A yogavibhaga means splitting Sutta without the word “karite”. 
So, in this split-Sutta function, the word Karite is excluded. 
[yoga-Sutta, vibhaga-splitting] 


676 


Akhyata Kappa 


५१६, ४६६. इकारागमो असब्बधातुकम्हि 

516, 466. I-kara’gamo asabbadhatukamhi”, 
[I-kara-agamo-asabbadhatukamhi. 2 words] 

[V] Sabbasmim asabbadhatukamhi i-kara' gamo hoti. 


In verbs with asabbadhatuka vibhatti-terminations, there 
should come an “i” after the last consonant of the root and 
be joined to it. (See the inserted “i” shown in bold, underlined in the 
examples. See the footnote of Sutta 431 for Asabbadhatuka vibhatti) 


e gamissati-(He) will go. [wa] gamu-ssati. 

e karissati-(He) will do. [wa] kara-ssati. 

* labhissati-(He) will obtain. [wa] labha+ssati. 
e pacissati-(He) will cook. [wa] pacatssati. 


Asabbadhatukamhr’ti kimattham? 

What is the word “asabbadhatukamhi” for? 

To show that as the vibhattis in the examples below do not 
belong to “asabbadhatuka” group, the function is therefore 
not applied. 

* gacchati-(He) goes. 

* karoti-(He) does. [WA shown already] 

* Jabhati-(He) obtains. [wa] labhata+ti. 

* pacati-(He) cooks. [wa] pacatatti. 


48 This Sutta enjoins to mark a very definitive form of Akhyata verbs in the 
asabbadhatuka vibhatti-terminations by requiring an “i” to be inserted 
after the root and to attach that vowel to the last consonant of the root. 


677 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


५१७, ४८८. क्वचि धातुविभत्तिपच्चयानं दीघविपरीतादेसलोपागमा च 
517, 488. Kvaci? dhatuvibhattipaccayanar digha, 
viparita'desa, lopa’gama ca. 
[Kvaci+dhatu, vibhatti, paccayanamdigha, viparita, adesa, 
lopa, agama+ca. 4 words] 

[V] Idha akhyate anidditthesu sadhanesu kvaci dhatu, vibhatti, 
paccayanam digha,viparita’desa,lopa’ gama-icce’ tani 
kariyani jinavacananurüpani katabbani. 

All the necessary morphological procedures such as digha, 
viparita, adesa, lopa and agama which conforms to usage 
in Buddhist texts, can be occasionally performed as neces- 
sary for verbs of all roots, vibhattis and affixes whose mor- 
phological procedures were not explained in this Akhyata 
section. 


(1) * jayati-(It) borns, arises. [wa] janat+a+ti. 

(2) * kareyya-(He) should do. [wa] kara+oteyya. 
[“०” affix is elided by this Sutta.] 

(3) * janiya-(It) should be known. [For wa, re: 508] 

(4) * S1yà-(It) is or it should be. [For wa, Re: 506] 

(5) * kare-(He) should do. [wa] kara+eyya. 


^9 This is one of mahavisaya Suttas in this grammar [maha-greattvisaya- 
domain of influence in affecting various morphological procedures]. 
There are four Maha-visaya Suttas according to the following verse: 
Mahasutta 'tesu vuddhi, ?kvaci dhatu ca *paccaya 
"danittha ^yadanupa'ti, cattari’pi nipatana. 
They are: (1) Tesu Vuddhi (Sutta No. 404) (2) Kvaci dhatu (Sutta No. 517) 
(3) Paccaya’danittha (Sutta No. 571) (4) Ya’danuppanna (Sutta No. 391). The 
role of a mahavisaya Sutta is to invoke the power of any necessary morpho- 
logical procedure required for the completion of a word whose procedures are 
not directly mentioned through injunction of a specific Sutta in the grammat- 
ical text. This grammatical concept of having such Suttas is one unique as- 
pect of the Pali grammar to allow any applicable morphological procedure for 
any word not shown in the grammar text. 


678 


Akhyata Kappa 


(6) * gacche-(He) should go. [wa] gamu+eyya. [“eyya” is substi- 
tuted with “6” by this Sutta in examples 5 and 6.] 

(7) * jafiia-(He) should know or (it) should be known. [Re: 508] 

(8) ° vakkhetha-(You) should say. pl. [wa] vacat+tha. [Component 

word “ca” of the root changed into “khe” by this Sutta] 

(9) * dakkhetha-(You) should see. pl. [wa] disat+tha. 
[Component word “sa” of the root changed into “khe” by this 
Sutta and “i” of the root “disa” changed into “a’’] 

(10) ० dicchati-(He) sees. [wa] disa+ti. 

[Component word “sa” of the root changed into “ccha” by this Sutta] 

(11) * agacchi-(He) went. [wa] gamut. (Ajjattant) 

[The “T shortened into “i” by this Sutta. Also refer to 476, 519] 
(12) * agacchum-(They) went. [wa] gamu+um. [Re: 476, 519] 
(13) * ahosi-(It) was. [wa] ht+1 

EP 


1” changed into “si” by this Sutta] 
(14) * ahesum-(They) were. [wa] hū+um. 


Icce’va’madini-so on. afifiani'pi-others also. sadhanani-example 
words of Sadhana. yojetabbani-should be applied. 


५१८, ४४६. अत्तनोपदानि परस्सपदत्तं 
518, 446. Attanopadani parassapadattam. 


[Attanopadani+parassapadattam. 2 words] 
[V] Attanopadani kvaci parassapadatta’mapajjante. 


Sometimes, the Attanopada vibhattis assume the physical 
mode of Prassapada vibhattis (except in terms of actual 


voice.) 

This means that they can take physical appearance of the Parassapada 
vibhattis by having all six prassapada-terminations at the end of verbs 
as if they are Prassapada. However, the voice still remains in passive 
voice. Sometimes it is referred to as reversal of Attanopada vibhattis 
into Parassapada vibhattis. In the examples below, see the underlined 
Parassapada verb-endings shown in bold. Actually, they are reversed 
from Attanopada verb-ending “te” to “ti”. Therefore, in WA, it has to 
be shown as “te” to represent its true Vibhatti. 





679 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


e vuccati-(It is) said. [wa] vacatya-te. 
e Jabbhati-(It is) obtained. [wa] labhat+yatte. 
e paccati-(It is) cooked. [wa] pacatyatte. 


Kvacr ti kimattham? 

What is the word “kvaci” for? 

It shows that as restricted by the word “kvaci”, the function 
of Sutta is not applied in some examples shown below. 
(Hence, Attanopada verb-ending “te” remains without being reversed. 
See the underlined verb-endings shown in bold, underlined). 

* kariyate-(is) done. [wa] kara+yatte. 

* Jabbhate-(is) obtained. [wa] labha+ya+te. 

* paccate-(is) cooked. [wa] pacatyatte. 


५१९, ४५७. अकारागमो हिय्यत्तनीअज्जतनीकालातिपत्तीसु 
519, 457. Akara’gamo™ hiyyattanrajjatani, 
kalatipattisu. 
[Akara-agamothiyyattani, ajjatani, kalatipattisu. 2 words] 
[V] Kvaci akaragamo hoti hiyyattani,ajjatani,kalatipatti- 
icce’tasu vibhattisu. 


In verbs with Hiyyattanl, Ajjatani, Kalatipatti vibhatti- 
terminations, there should sometimes come an “a” and be 
inserted at the initial point of such verbs. 

(See the added “a” shown in bold, underlined. This “a” has no meaning 
except that it is a distinctive symbolic mark of Hiyyattani, Ajjatani 
and Kalatipatti vibhatti-applied verbs) 





50 The function of this Sutta clearly marks a salient form of Akhyata verbs in 
Hiyyattani, Ajjatani, Kalatipatti vibhatti-terminations by requiring an “a” 
to be placed before the verbs. However, this function 1s not a consistent fea- 
ture. Sometimes there are verbs without an “a” being applied before them. 


See the examples of *kvaci" to clarify this. Note that this “a” has no meaning 
at all except to denote the past of action as implied by the verb. 


680 


Akhyata Kappa 


e agama-(he) went. [wa] gamu+a. 
e agami-(he) went. [wa] gamu+i 
* agamissa-(he) might have gone (but did not). [wa] gamutssa. 


Kvacr'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “kvaci” for? 

It shows that as restricted by the word "kvaci", the function 
of Sutta is not applied in some examples shown below 
though they are in Hiyyattant, Ajjatani, Kalatipatti vibhattis. 
* gama, * gami, * gamissa. (The same meaning and wa as those 
preceding three examples shown in this Sutta) 


५२०, ५०२. ब्रूतो $ तिम्हि 
520, 502. Brito 1 timhi. [Brito+i+timhi. 3 words] 
[V] Brü-icce'taya dhatuya 1kara'gamo hoti timhi vibhattimhi. 


There should come an ‘T’ after the root word “bru” when a 


“ti” vibhatti is applied. 

Note: In the example, the vowel “a” of “bru” changes into “o” through 
vuddhi process and it further changes into “av” and "Y" is then inserted 
by this Sutta. The inserted "1" is shown in bold, underlined. 


e braviti-(he) says. [wa] brit+a+ti 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


५२१, ४२५. धातुस्सन्तो लोपो नेकसरस्स 

521, 425. Dhatussa'?nto?! lopo’nekasarassa. 
[Dhatussa-*anto-*lopo-ana-ekasarassa. 4 words] 

[V] Dhatussa anto kvaci lopo hoti ane’kasarassa. 


The last component vowel of the multiple-stem roots hav- 
ing multiple-vowels, is usually elided except a few roots. 
Note: This Sutta deletes the last vowel in multi-stem roots as a basic 
morphological standard procedure before other procedures are per- 
formed. 


* gacchati-(he) goes. * sarati-(he) remembers. * marati-(he) dies. 


Ane’kasarasse’ti kimattham? 

What is the word “ane’kasarassa” for? 

To show that the function of Sutta is not applied in the ex- 
amples shown below as they are of single-vowel, one letter 
(single-stem) roots. 

* pati-(he) drinks. [wa] patatti. 

* yati-(he) goes. [wa] yatatti. 

* vati-(It) goes. [wa] vatatti. 


Kvacr'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “kvaci” for? 

It shows that as restricted by the word "kvaci", the function 
of Sutta is not applied in some examples as those shown be- 
low even though they are multiple-stem roots. 

* Mahtyati-(is) honored. [wa] maha-ya-te. 

* mathiyati-(is) churned. [wa] matha+ya-+te. 


5! When carrying out the morphological procedures, the function of this Sutta 
is usually applied in almost all Akhyata and Kita verbs except some verbs 
such as single-stem roots and some two or multiple-stem roots like those 
shown as restricted by “kvaci”. 


682 


Akhyata Kappa 


५२२, VOR. इसुयमून मन्तो च्छो वा 
522, 476. Isu, yamiina’manto ccho va. 
[Isu, yamünam-anto-ccho-va. 4 words] 
[V] Isu,yamu-icce'tesam dhàtünam anto echo hoti va. 


The last component consonants “s” and “m” of the roots 
“isu, yamu” sometimes changes into “ech”. 
[See the applied function “ech” shown in bold, underlined] 


e icchati-(he) wants. (Here, “s” becomes “cch”) [wa] isu- tati. 
e niyacchati-(he) abstains, restrains. (Here, “m” becomes "cch".) 
[wa] ni-Vyamutatti. 


Va’ti kimattham? 

What is the word “va” for? 

To shows that as restricted by the word “va”, the function 

of Sutta is not applied in some examples shown below. 

* esati-(he) wants or searches. “e” is vuddhi-vowel of “i” in the root 
“isu-to want, to search for”. [wa] isu+a+ti. 

* niyamati-(he) abstains. [wa] niVyamuta+ti. 


683 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


५२३, ५२६. कारितानं णो लोपं 

523, 526. Karitanarh no? lopar. 
[Karitanam+notloparh. 3 words] 

[V] Karita-icce'tesam paccayanam no lopa' mapajjate. 


The “n” of all causative affixes called “karita” is (always) 
to be elided. 
* kareti, * karayati, * karapeti, * karapayati. 

(Refer to Sutta 438) 


Nigama Gatha 
The Concluding Verses 


Sasana'ttham sa' muddittham, 
maya'khyatam samasato. 
Sakam buddhivisesena, 
cintayantu vicakkhana. 


*For the benefit of Buddha's Sasana, 
Akhyata section was explained briefly by me. 
By one's own special intelligence, 

may the wise study and analyze it". 


Iti akhyatakappe catuttho kando. 
The Fourth Section of Akhyata Verb ends. 


Akhyatakappo nitthito. 
Akhyata Chapter ends. 


52 "n? means those causative affixes which has an “p” in them. 


They are: ne, naya, nàpe, napaya. See Sutta No. 438, 452. 

When these affixes are applied after the root in a verb, n" has to be elided, 
only component vowels such as e, aya, ape, apaya will be left. Then vuddhi 
procedure is usually performed either in the initial or the middle vowel of the 
verb. The purpose of eliding by this Sutta is to enable vuddhi process and 
thereby leading to completion of the word. 


684 


Kibbidhana Kappa 


7. Kibbidhana Kappa 
Kita Chapter 
Pathama Kanda 
The First Section 


(a) Buddham fianasamuddam, 
sabbaritium lokahetu'khinamatim, 
vanditva pubba’maharh, 
vakkhami sasadhanam hi kitakappam. 


Having first prostrated to the Buddha 
Of the vast ocean of infinite wisdom, 
Inexhaustible in guiding the world, 

I am going to expound the Kita section, 
Which indeed comprises Sadanas. 


(b) Sadhanamülam hi payogam, 
ahu payogamila’matthan’ca, 
atthesu visaradamatayo, 
sasanassudhara jinassa mata. 


“The words are of Sadhana origin, 
The meaning too is of word origin” 
So said by the sages, 

Bearers of Buddha’s noble teachings, 
Who have erudite wisdom, 

On the meaning of words. 


(c) Andho desakavikalo, 
ghata, madhu, telani bhajanena vina, 
nattho natthani yatha, 
payogavikalo tatha attho. 


Just as the blind without a guide, 

clarified butter, honey and oil without vessel, 
Will perish and disappear. 

So will the meanings without example words. 


685 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


(d) Tasma samrakkhanattharh, 
munivacana'tthassa dullabhassa' ham, 
vakkhami sissakahitam, 
kitakappam sadhanena yutam. 


Therefore, to well preserve the meaning 

Of rarely available teachings of the holy sage, 
Will I expound the Kita section related to Sadhanas’’, 

Benefiting the generations of Students. 


५२४, ५६१. धातुया कम्मादिम्हि णो 
524, 561. Dhatuya kamma'dimhi no. 


[Dhatuya+kamma-adimhi+no. 3 words] 
[V] Dhatuya kamma'dimhi napaccayo hoti. 


An affix “na” is to be applied after the root which is pre- 
ceded by a Kamma (an object in accusative case). 
Summary: This Sutta applies a “na” affix after the roots 
preceded by a Kamma (a noun in accusative case). 


This noun in accusative case is known as “saddiipapada” 
which means a near-by word, closely located in front of the 


55 There are seven Sadhanas. They are Kattu, Kamma, Karana, Sampadana, 
Apadana, Adhikarana and Bhava. In Karaka chapter, the first six, except 
Bhava, are shown as six Karakas. There is some significant difference be- 
tween Karaka and Sadhana. While Karaka means that which facilitates an 
action, Sadhana rather means something which helps complete the word and 
defines the meaning of an individual kita or unadi-affixed word whose affix 
is being classified into one of these seven Sadhanas. Depending on specific 
Sadhana of the affix, the ED as well as the meaning of that word is affected 
in a very subtle way. However, it can not affect the case-ending of the 
word in the same way a specific Karaka can do. [Refer to the table in 
Karaka chapter to clarify]. The words affixed in Kattu, Kamma and Bhava 
sadhana-specific affixes have significant impact in a sentence-structure 
while other four Sadhanas have no significant effect. See the Appendix on the 
Karaka and Sadhana for a detailed explanation. 


686 


Kibbidhana Kappa 


roots “kara” etc. [saddü papada=sadda-syllable+upa-near+pada- 
word] 

Actually, the words shown as examples in Suttas 524, 525 are com- 
pound nouns known grammatically as “Kita’ntogadha dutiya Tappuri- 
sa". Therefore, in the word analysis of each example, the front compo- 
nent parts of the words such as kamma-work, kumbha-pot, mala- 
flower and so forth are to be regarded as saddüpapada, i.e. the preced- 
ing near-by words. “kara, gaha" and so on are the roots after which an 
affix “na” is to be applied. 

[Kita’ntogadha=Kita-a kita-nount+antogadha-inside. i.e. compound 
noun with a Kita-word inside as a component] 


(1) kammam-work. karoti’ti [karoti+iti] karoti-does. iti-for this 
reason] kammakaro-is called “kammakara”. ° kammakaro-the 
one who does work, i.e. worker, laborer. 

[wa] kamma-saddipapadat+karat+na 

Note: Always refer the front word as *saddüpapada" for all similar ex- 

amples. The words inside bracket are called ED. All EDs are Kattu- 

sadhana ones in this Sutta. 


Evam-similarly, 

(2) ° kumbhakaro-the one who makes pots, i.e. the potter. 
[wa] kumbha+karat+na 

(3) * malakaro-the one who makes flowers, i.e. the florist. 
[wa] mala-kara-*na [‘mala” is permanently feminine gender 
word] 

(4) * katthakaro-the one who makes fire-wood, i.e. fire-wood maker. 
[wa] kattha-wood+karat+na 

(5) * rathakaro-the one who makes chariot, i.e. the chariot-maker. 
[wa] ratha-chariott+karat+na 

(6) * rajatakaro-the one who does silver-craft, i.e. the silver-smith. 
[wa] rajata-silver+karat+na 

(7) * suvannakaro-the one who makes gold-craft, i.e. the gold-smith. 
[wa] suvanna-kara-*na 

(8) * pattaggaho-the one who holds bowl, i.e. the panhandler, beggar. 
[wa] patta+gahatna 

(9) * tantavayo-the one who weaves thread, i.e. the weaver, textile- 
worker. [wa] tantatvetna 














687 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


(10) * dhafifiamayo-the one who measures grains, i.e. the grain- 
measurer. [wa] dhafifia+mat+na 

(11) * dhammakamo-the one who prefers Dhamma, i.e. the 
Dhamma-admirer, a spiritual person. [wa] dhamma--kamu-na 

(12) * dhammacaro-the one who practices Dhamma, i.e. the 
Dhamma-practitioner. [wa] dhamma+caratna 


५२५, ५६५. सञ्जाय म नु 

525, 565 Sannaya’ma nu. [Safhayarmtatnu. 3 words] 

[V] Saüfiaya'mabhidheyyayam dhatuya kamma'dimhi 
akarapaccayo hoti. namamhi ca nukara’gamo hoti. 


When denoting a personal name, an affix “a” is applied af- 
ter the roots preceded by a Kamma word and a "nu" is also 
placed after the word denoting name. 

[Two functions. The “nu” changes into a niggahita “m” later on by Sut- 
ta 537 and further functions. See it shown in bold, underlined] 


(1) arim-enemy. dameti’ti [dameti+iti] dameti-subdues. iti- 
therefore. arindamo-is so called. ० arindamo-the one who 
subdues enemies. ràJà-the king who subdues enemies is to be 
regarded as *arindamo". [wa] ari-saddipapada+damuta 

(2) vessam-the merchant road. tarati’ti [tarati+iti] tarati-passes. iti- 
so. ० Vessantaro-is so called. raja-the king who was born past the 
merchant road, is to be regarded as such. (Here, “th” changed into 
“n”) [wa] vessattarata 

(3) tanham-the craving. karot?’ ti [karoti+iti] karoti-overcomes. iti 
* tanhankaro-is so called. bhagava-the Buddha who overcomes 
craving is to be regarded as “tanhankaro”. [wa] tanha+karat+a 

Note: Here, the root “kara” does not mean “to do". It means “to over- 

whelm, to kill”. 


(4) medham-wisdom. karoti’ti [karoti+iti] karoti-makes. iti 
e medhankaro-the wisdom-maker, the one who can lead to devel- 
opment of wisdom for all. bhagava-the Buddha who makes (pro- 
motes) wisdom (in other beings), is to be regarded as “medhankaro”. 
[wa] medha+karata 


688 


Kibbidhana Kappa 


(5) saranam-refuge or sanctuary. karoti'ti ० saranankaro-the one 
who creates refuge or sanctuary. bhagava-the Buddha who makes 
refuge or sanctuary (for all beings) is to be regarded as “sarananka- 
ro". [wa] Saranat+karat+a 

(6) dipam-the light of wisdom. karotr'ti ° dipankaro-the light of 
wisdom maker. bhagava-the Buddha who makes the light of wis- 
dom is to be regarded as “dipankaro”. [wa] dipat+karata 

Note: All EDs in this Sutta are Kattu-sadhana EDs. 


५२६, ५६७. पुरे ददा च इं 

526, 567. Pure dada ca im. [Pure+dadā+ca+im. 4 words] 

[V] Purasadde adimhi dada-icce'taya dhatuya akarapaccayo 
hoti. purasaddassa akarassa ca im hoti. 


An affix “a” is added after the root word “dada” prefixed 
with the word "pure". In addition, the last component vow- 
el “a” of “pura” changes into "im". (Later that “rh excluding-i” 
becomes *n") 


pure-in the previous past. danarh-alms, charitable giving. adasT ti 
[adasi+iti] adasi-gave. iti-so. ० purindado-the one who gave alms in 
the previous past lives. devaraja-the king of heaven is to be regarded 
as “purindado”. [Kattu-sadhana ED] 

[wa] Pura-saddiipapada+dadata 


५२७, ५६८. सब्बतो ण्वुत्वावी वा 
527, 568. Sabbato nvu,tva’vi va. 
[Sabbatot+nvu, tu, avi+va. 3 words] 
[V] Sabbato dhatuto kamma’dimhi và akamma’dimhi và 
akara,nvu,tu,avi icce'te paccaya honti. 


Either being preceded by a Kamma (object) word or not, 
the affixes “a, nvu, tu, av?" are applied after all roots. 
[This Sutta applies these four affixes after the roots whether there is a 
preceding Kamma word or not] 


689 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


Examples of a-affixed words 
(1) tam-that deed. karoti’ti [karoti+iti] ° takkaro-the one who does 
that deed. [wa] Ta-saddüpapada--kara-*a 
(2) hitam-wellbeing. karotr'ti ® hitakaro the one who creates well- 
being. [Both 1 and 2 are Kattu-sadhana EDs] 
[wa] hita-saddipapadat+karat+a 
(3) vineti-(It) disciplines. ettha-in this precept. etena’ti [etena-iti] 
etena-by this code of conduct. iti. và-to show other method of 
Viggaha. vinayo-is called *vinaya". * vinayo-the discipline 
where one is trained in or by which one is regulated (to conduct 
properly). [Adhikarana and Karana-sadhana EDs for this word] 
[wa] Vivnita 
Note: Please study the ED of this word *vinayo". It is shown in two 
methods, one using an adhikarana (locative case) “ettha” and the other 
using a Karana (instrumental case) *etena". The first is called adhi- 
karana sadana and the second ED is called Karana sadhana. The 
complete meaning of “vinayo” also has to be systematically translated 
in accordance with the ED explanation of the word. 


(4) nissaya-being dependent on. narh-to that person or that thing. 
vasatt’ti [vasatititi] vasati-(one) lives. iti ® nissayo-supporting 
person or things such as teacher and requisites on which one de- 
pends. [Kamma or Kattu sadhana ED] [wa] Nivsi*a 


Examples of nvu-affixed words 
Nvunmhi-(Here are examples of) nvu-affixed words. 
(1) ratham-chariot. karoti'ti ® rathakarako-the one who makes 
chariot, the chariot-maker. 
[wa] ratha-saddiipapada+karat+nvu 
(2) annam-food. dadātī’ti [dadati+iti] dadati-(one) gives. iti 
* annadayako-the one who gives food, food-giver. 
[wa] anna-saddipapadat+da+nvu 
(3) vineti-(one) leads. satte’ti [satte+iti] satte-beings. iti 
* vinayako-the one who leads others, the leader. 
[wa] vivni-nvu 
(4) karot?’ti [karoti+iti] * karako-the one who makes, maker, the 
doer. [wa] kara+nvu 
(5) dadatt’ ti [dadati+iti] ° dayako-the one who donates, the donor. 
[wa] da+nvu 





690 


Kibbidhana Kappa 


(6) neti'ti [neti+iti] neti-(one) leads. iti * nayako-the one who 
leads, the leader. [All Kattu-sadhana EDs] [wa] nr*nvu 


Examples of tu-affixed words 
Tumhi-(Here are examples of) tu-affixed words. 
(1) (a) tam-that deed. karotr'ti ® takkatta-the one who does that 
deed. (one “k” and "t" is augmented) 
(b) tassa katta'ti va * takkatta-the one who does that deed. 
(2 EDs. In ED-a, the word "ta-that" is shown in accusative case 
"tam". In ED-b, it is shown in genitive case "tassa".) 
[wa] ta-saddüpapada--kara-tu 
(2) (a) bhojanam-food. dadatt’ ti ° bhojanadata-the one who gives 
food, the food-giver. 
(b) bhojanassa data'ti va bhojanadata-the one who gives food, 
the food-donor (2 EDs). 
[wa] bhojana-saddüpapada--da--tu 
(3) Karotr'ti ® katta-the one who makes, the maker. [wa] karat+tu 
(4) Sarati'ti * sarita-the one who remembers. [wa] sara+tu 


Examples of avr-affixed words 
Avimhi-(Here are examples of) avi-affixed words. 
(1) bhayam-danger. passatt’ti [passati+iti] passati-(one) sees. iti 
e bhayadassavi-the one who sees danger. 
[wa] bhaya-saddipapadat+disa+Avi [All are Kattusadhana EDs. ] 
icce' va! madi-and so on. 


५२८, ५७७. विसरुजपदादितो Ur 
528, 577. Visa,ruja,pada'dito na. 


[Visa, ruja, pada-adito+na. 2 words] 


[V] Visa,ruja,pada-icce' va' madihi dhatühi napaccayo hoti. 


An affix “na” is applied after various roots such as visa, 
ruja, pada and so on. 


(1) pavisati'ti [pavisati+iti] pavisati-(one) enters. iti ® paveso-the 
one who enters. [wa] paVvisatna 

(2) rujatr'ti [rujati+iti] rujati-(It) afflicts. iti ® rogo-that which af- 
flicts, pain or disease. [wa] ruja+na 


691 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


(3) uppajjat? ti [uppajjati+iti] uppajjati-(It) arises. iti ° uppado- 
that which arises, the process of arising. [Wa] uVpadat+na 

(4) phusatr'ti [phusati+iti] phusati-(it) touches. iti * phasso-that 
which touches, contact. [wa] phusa+na 

(5) ucatr'ti [ucati+iti] ucati-(It) emerges (as a whole). iti * oko-that 
which emerges as a whole (from a state of small pieces), i.e. a house 
etc. [wa] ucatna 

(6) bhavat? ti [bhavati+iti] bhavati-(It) arises. iti ® bhavo-that 
which arises, act of arising. [wa] bhū+ņa 

(7) ayat? ti [ayati-iti] ayati-(It) arises. iti ® ayo-that which arises (as 
an income), revenue. [wa] ayatna 

(8) samma-well, bujjhatt’ti [bujjhati+iti] bujjhati-(one) knows. iti 
* sambodho-the one who knows well, a Buddha. 
[wa] sariVbudha+na 

(9) viharat?’ ti [viharati+iti] viharati-(It) removes (physical tensions). 
iti * viharo-that which removes physical tensions, an act of dwell- 
ing at a place (where one can relax one’s bodily tensions either by 
lying down, or sitting or choosing whatever alternative bodily mode 
is comfortable.) [wa] viv haratna 
[All are Kattu sadhana EDs] 


५२९, ५८०. भावे च 
529, 580. Bhave ca. [Bhave+ca. 2 words] 
[V] Bhavattha’bhidheyye sabbadhatühi napaccayo hoti. 


An affix “na” is applied after all roots in the sense of bhava 
(action). 


(1) [a] paccate, [b] pacanam-cooking. va-to show other method. 
e pako-act of cooking. [wa] paca+na 
(2) [a] cajate-sharing. [b] cajanam-sharing. và ® cago-act of shar- 
ing, giving charity. [Bhava-sadhana] [wa] cajatna 
Note: The numbers indicate two modes of ED, one using an Akhyata 
verb of Bhava voice and the other being a Kita verb of bhava sense. 
However, both verbs signify “Bhava”. Both EDs are similar in meaning 
except the verb-forms. 
Evam-similarly in this way. 


692 


Kibbidhana Kappa 


(3) * yago-act of sacrifice, the sacrifice. [wa] yajatna 

(4) * yogo-act of tying up, or making effort. [wa] yujatna 

(5) * bhago-act of dividing or sharing of portions. [wa] bhaja--na 

(6) * paridaho-act of burning (as with heat, desire or emotions etc.). 
[All Bhava sadhana EDs] [wa] pari-Vdahatna 


५३०, ५८४. क्वि च 
530, 584. Kvi ca. [Kvitca. 2 words] 
[V] Sabbadhàtühi kvipaccayo hoti. 


An affix “kvi” is applied after all roots. 


(1) sambhavatr'ti [sambhavati+iti] sambhavati-(one) which hap- 
pens well or arises well. iti * sambhü-the one which happens or 
arises well. [wa] sarnNbhü--kvi 

(2) visesena-specially. bhavatt’ti [bhavati+iti] bhavati-(one) aris- 
es. Iti * vibhü-the one which specially happens or arises. 

[wa] viVbhü--kvi 

(3) bhujena-by being in zigzag twists, wiggling. gacchatr't1 [gac- 
chati+iti] gacchati-(one) goes. iti ° bhujago-the one which 
moves in twists. a snake or a reptile which moves sinuously. 

[wa] bhuja-saddipapadat+ gamutkvi 
(4) [a] sam attanarh-oneself. khanati-(it) digs. 
[b] sar sutthu-well. khanatt’ti [khanati+iti] khanati iti va-to 
show other form of ED. 
* sankho-the sea creature which digs itself or which burrows well 
(into the sand), conch, marine gastropod mollusks. [2 EDs, All 
Kattu-sadhana EDs] [wa] sarnVkhanutkvi 


693 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


५३१, ५८९. धरादीहि रम्मो 
531, 589. Dhara'dihi rammo. [Dhara-adihi+rammo. 2 words] 
[V] Dhara-icce' vamadihi dhatühi ramma-paccayo hoti. 


An affix “ramma” is applied after the roots such as dhara 
etc. 


(1) dharati-carries (good results). tena’ti [tena+iti] tena-by virtue 
of that wholesome meritorious deed. iti ० dhammo-the whole- 
some righteous Dhamma by which good-result are carried. 
[Karana-sadhana ED] [wa] dharatramma. 

(2) kartyate-(is) done. tan’ti [tarn*iti] tam-that action. iti 
* kammath-that which is being done, an action. [Kamma-sadhana 
ED] [wa] kara*ramma. 


५३२, ५९०. तस्सीलादीसु णीत्वावी च 
532, 590. Tassila'disu nitva’vi ca. 
[Tasstla-adisutnt, tu, avitca. 3 words] 
[V] Sabbehi dhatühi tassila'disva'tthesu ni, tu, avi-icce’te 
paccaya honti. 


In expressing (either) a habitual pattern etc. (an ingrained 

nature or a dedicated habit of doing things well), “ni, tu, 

avi’ affixes are applied after all roots. 

Note: The words within parenthesis are included for the sake of com- 

pleteness as implied by the word “adi? contained in the word 

“Tassiladisu’”. By that word “adi-etc”, (1) Taddhamma and (2) 

Tassadhukari are implied. 

(1) Tassila-ta-that*sila-habit. i.e. a habit, habitual pattern, a 
consistent character. 

(2) Taddhammacta-that-dhamma-nature. i.e. an ingrained, 
innate nature. 

(3) Tassadhukari=ta-that+sadhu-well+kar1-used to do. i.e. the 
one who used to do efficiently in doing something. 
All three affixes applied by this Sutta signify one of 
these three meanings. The words in these affixes are 
widely found in the Pali texts. 


694 


Kibbidhana Kappa 


Examples 

(1) piyarh-to whom one loves. pasarhsiturh-to praise. silam-(is) 
the habit. yassa rafifio-of whoever king. so-that. hoti-is. raja- 
king (syntactically related to the word “so-that”), i.e. The king 
whose habit is only to praise the loved one, that (type of) king. 
piyapasarmsl-is called “piyapasarhst”. * piyapasarhsi-the king 
who used to praise the loved ones. 

[wa] piya-saddiipapadatpaVsarnsatni [pa is a prefix of the 
root] 

(2) brahmarh-the holy practice. cariturh-to practice. silam-(is) the 
habit. yassa puggalassa-of any individual. so-that. hoti-is. 
puggalo-individual. ° brahmacari-the individual who used to 
practice holy practice. [wa] brahma-saddipapada+cara+nt 

(3) pasayha-by overbearing. pavattitum-to behave. silam yassa 
rafifio, so hoti raja * pasayhapavattha-the king who used to 
behave overbearingly. [wa] pasayha-saddipapadatpaVvatuttu 

(4) bhayam-the danger. passiturh-to see. silam yassa samaņas- 
Sa-of any monastic. so hoti samano-monastic. ० bhayadas- 
savi-the monk who used to see dangers (of unwholesome actions). 
[wa] bhaya-saddiipapada+disat+avi 

Note: All are Kattu-sadhana EDs. 

icce'va'madi. 


५३३, ५९१. सद्दकुधचलमण्डत्थरुचादीहि यु 
533, 591. Sadda,kudha,cala,manda'ttha,ruca' dihi 
yu. [Sadda, kudha, cala, manda'ttha, ruca-adthit+yu. 2 words] 
[V] Sadda,kudha,cala,mandatthehi ca ruca'dihi ca dhatuhi 
yupaccayo hoti tassila' disva'tthesu. 


When expressing a habitual pattern etc, a “yu” affix is ap- 
plied after the roots “sadda, kudha, cala, manda, ruca” 
etc. 


(1) ghosanasilo-the one whose habit is to be vocal. * ghosano-the 
vocal one, noisy talker. [wa] ghusat+yu 


695 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


(2) bhasanasilo-the one used to talk. « bhasano-the talkative. 
[wa] bhasatyu 
Evarh-thus. viggaho-the ED. katabbo-should be done, 
i.e. the EDs of the remaining examples should be done similarly. 
(3) * kodhano-the one who used to get angry, temperamental person. 
[wa] kudhat+yu 
(4) * dosano-the one who used to spoil, the spoiler. [Wa] dusa+yu 
(5) * calano-the one used to shake, the fickle person. [wa] calatyu 
(6) * kampano (same meaning as “calano”). [wa] kapi*yu 
(7) * phandano (same meaning as “calano”). [wa] phadi*yu 
(8) * mandano-the one who used to adorn. [wa] madi*yu 
(9) * vibhüsano-the one who used to beautify. [wa] viVbhiisatyu 
(10) * rocano-the one which used to be bright and shiny. 
[wa] rucat+yu 
(11) * jotano-the one which used to be bright and flashy. 
[wa] juta+yu 
(12) * vaddhano-the one which used to be progressive. 
[wa] vaddhat+yu 


५३४, ५९२. पारादिगमिम्हा रू 

534, 592. Para’digamimha ru. [Para-adigamimhá-rü. 2 words] 

[V] Gamu-icce'tamha dhatumha parasadda’dimha rüpaccayo 
hoti tassila’disva’tthesu. 


When expressing a habitual pattern etc, a “rū” affix is ap- 
plied after the root word “gamu” prefixed with the word 
"pára-shore". 


bhavassa-of life. pararh-other shore or side. bhavaparam-the oth- 
er shore of life. [This is a minor partial ED, Chatthi tappurisa]. bha- 
vapararh-to the other shore of life. gantum-to go. silam yassa 
purisassa-of man. so hoti puriso * bhavaparagü-the man whose 
habit is to go the other shore of life, i.e. an enlightened Arahanta monk. 
[This is complete ED of the example. Kattu-sadhana ED] 

[wa] bhavapaàra-saddüpapadatgamu-trü 
Note: All syllables “am” of the root "gamu" and 


664.99 
r 


of the affix are 


696 


Kibbidhana Kappa 


elided by Sutta 539. “u” of the root is already elided by Sutta 521. Thus, 
it becomes a complete word as *Bhavaparagü". 


Tassiladisvi ti kimattham? 

What is the word “‘tassiladisu” for? 

To show that the example shown below is inapplicable as it 
does not have an expression of “tasstla-a habitual pattern" 
in it. (So, the affix “rū” is not applied) 

* parangato-the one who had gone to the other shore of life. 

[wa] pàára-saddüpapadat-gamu-ta [Re Sutta 555 for this affix] 
Paradigamimha'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “paradigamimha” for? 

To show that the example below is not prefixed with “para” 
as indicated in Sutta, but prefixed with “anu”. So it is inap- 
plicable. (So, the affix “rū” is not applied.) 

* anugami-the one who used to follow. [wa] anuVgamu-ni 


५३५, ५९३. भिक्खादितो च 

535, 593. Bhikkha’ dito ca. [Bhikkha-adito-*ca. 2 words] 

[V] Bhikkha-icce' va'madihi dhatihi rüpaccayo hoti 
tassila’disva’tthesu. 


When expressing a habitual pattern etc, a “rū” affix is ap- 
plied after the roots “bhikkha” etc. 


(1) bhikkhanasilo yacanasilo-the one who used to beg. 

* bhikkhu-the one used to begging. [wa] bhikkha-rü 
Note: Yacanasilo is synonymous with Bhikkhanasilo. 
(2) vijananastlo-the one used to analytically understand. 

* vififiü-the wise person, an analyst. [wa] vi-ñā+rū 


697 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


५३६, ५९४. हनत्यादीनं णुको 
536, 594. Hanatya’dinam nuko. 
[Hana-iti-admarm+nuko. 2 words] 
[V] Hanatya’dinarh dhatünam ante nukapaccayo hoti 
tassila'disva'tthesu. 


When expressing a habitual pattern etc. a “nuka” affix is 
applied after the roots “hana” etc. 


(1) ahananasilo-the one used to kill or hurt. ® aghatuko-the execu- 
tioner, killer. [wa] aVhana+nuka 

(2) karanasilo-the one used to do (crafts). ° karuko-the artisan, car- 
penter, craftsman etc. [wa] kara*nuka 


५३७, ५६६. नु निग्गहितं पदन्ते 

537, 566. Nu niggahitam pada’nte. 
[Nu-*niggahitam-pada-ante. 3 words] 

[V] Pada’nte nukara'gamo niggahita’mapajjate. 


The word “nu”, which has been applied at the end of a 
kamma word (by Sutta 525), changes into a “niggahita-rh”. 


66999 com 


[This “th” further changes into “n” or “ñ” or “ñ”.] 


(1) arim dametr'ti ® arindamo. raja. 
[wa] ari-saddüpapada*damu-a 
(2) vessam tarati’ti * vessantaro. raja. (Refer to Sutta 525) 
[wa] vessa-saddipapadattarata 
(3) pabham-the light. karotr'ti [karoti+iti] karoti-makes. iti 
* pabhankaro-the light-maker. bhagava-the Buddha who makes 
the light of wisdom is to be regarded as “pabhankaro”’. 
[wa] pabha-saddipapadat+karata 


698 


Kibbidhana Kappa 


५३८, ५९५. संहनाञ्ञाय वा रो घो 
538, 595. Samhana’nnaya va ro gho. 
[Samhana-afitiayatvatro*gho. 5 words] 
[V] Sampubbaya hana-iccetaya dhatuya, afifiaya va dhatuya 
ra-paccayo, hanassa ca gho hoti. 


A “ra” affix is to be added after the root “hana” prefixed 
with an upasagga "sam" and other roots. Besides, that root 
word “hana” changes into "gh". [Two functions] 


(1) samaggam-being united. kammarmr-to the activities. 
sa’mupagacchatt’ti [sarh+upatgacchatit+iti] samupagacchati- 
congregates. iti-therefore. sangho-is called “Sangho”. 

[sarh=well, unitedly+upa=closely+gacchati=goes, i.e. gathering 
together unitedly] 

* sangho-the community of brethren who congregates to (conduct) 
the sacred activities unitedly. [Kattu-sadhana] 

[wa] sam V-hana-ra 

(2) samantato-from all around. nagarassa-of the city. bahire- 
outside. khafifiatT ti [khaffatititi] khafifiati-(is) dug. iti-so. 

* parikha-that which is dug outside city (filled with water to pro- 
vide security), a moat. [Kamma-sadhana] 
[wa] pari V-khanu-tra 

(3) antam-the ending. karot?’ ti [karoti+iti] karoti-(It) does. iti 
* antako-the end-maker, terminator of life, i.e. the devil or death. 
[Kattu-sadhana ED] [wa] anta-saddüpapada-kara-*ra 


Sam-iti kimattham? What is the word "sam" for? 

To show that example shown here is inapplicable as it is 
not prefixed with *sam", but with an “upa” instead. So, it 
is inapplicable. 

upahananam-hurting closely.* upaghato-closely hurting, a 
close irritant such as bodily or mental pain or fear etc. 

[wa] upaVhana+na [Bhava-sadhana ED] 


699 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


५३९, ५५८. रम्हि रन्तो रादि नो 
539, 558. Ramhi ra’nto ra’di no. 
[Ramhitra-antotra-adi+no. 4 words] 
[V] Ramhi paccaye pare sabbo dhatva’nto ra-kara’ di lopo hoti. 


When either a “ra” affix or any r-containing morpheme is 

present in a word, the first component vowel preceding the 

last vowel-less consonant of the root and that last consonant 

of the root too are usually to be elided along with the vowel 

of the “r-containing affix” as well as any r-containing 

morphemes. 

Summary: This Sutta deletes: 

(1) the component vowel in front of the last vowel-less con- 
sonant of the root, 

(2) the vowel-less consonant of the root (It is referred to as 


vowel-less as its vowel was already elided by Sutta 521 in the initial 
procedure), 


(3) the vowel of any of *r-containing affix", 

(4) any r-contained morphemes such as those applied by 
Sutta 572. (Examples 1,2 and 3 have r-containing affixes while 
example 4 contains r-morphemes). 


The list of r-containing affixes (8) 
ramma (531), rü (534), ra (538), ricca (542), ririya (554), 
ratthu (566), ritu (567), ratu (568). 


The list of r-containing functions (4) 
rittha (572), rattha, ratthum (These two functions are applied 
by means of “ca” of 572), racca (598). 


(1) * antako-the end-maker, terminator, i.e. the devil or death. 
[wa] anta-saddüpapada-kara-ra (anta-the end+kara-to do) 
(2) * paragu-the one who have reached the shore (the climax of some- 
thing), also an expert. [wa] pára-saddüpapada-gamu-rü 
(3) * sattha-the one who instructs, i.e. a teacher. [wa] sasat+ratthu 
(4) ° dittho-seen. [wa] disatta 
icce'va'madi. 


700 


Kibbidhana Kappa 


Detailed Explanation 

[As the rule of Sutta and the related morphological procedures are a bit com- 

plex for uninitiated beginner, a simple explanation is given below.] 

First, look at the WA of the word *antako" as shown above. 

(a) Here (refer to wa of item 1, shown above), the root is “kara”. The first 
“a” after “k” as well as the vowel-less “r” are to be deleted along with the 
applied affix “ra” leaving only the words *Anta--k". 

Note: Assume that “r” is vowel-less as its “a” had been already elided by 

Sutta 521 in the initial procedure of morphology for this word. It will then 

look like this=anta+k. 

(b) Then, this pending incomplete word “anta+k” is to be formally recog- 
nized as a noun by means of Sutta 601. 

(c) Only after this formal recognition procedure, a nominative singular “si” 
can be applied. Thus, > anta+k+si. 

(d) Then, that “si” is to be changed into “o” by 1042 antako (complete) 
[Through such a detailed step-by-step morphological process, this word 
becomes a complete word] 


५४०, ५४५. भावकम्मेसु तब्बानीया 
540, 545. Bhavakammesu tabba’niya. 
[Bhava, kammesu-tabba, aniya. 2 words] 
[V] Bhava,kamma-icce’tesva’tthesu tabba,aniya-icce’te 
paccaya honti sabbadhatühi. 


The affixes “tabba, aniya" are applied after all roots in the 
sense of both Bhava and Kamma voices. 

Note: Any word affixed with these “tabba, aniya" affixes 
are to be regarded as belonging to Bhava and Kamma sense 
verbs and verbal nouns. See each pairs of examples. 


(1) [a]* bhavitabbarh-(It) should be (Kamma sense), or the state of 
being (Bhàva sense). [wa] bhü--tabba 
[b]* bhavantyarh-(It) should be (Kamma), or state of being 
(Bhava). [wa] bhü-aniya 

(2) [a]* asitabbam-(It should be) entered, or act of entering. 
[wa] asa--tabba [b]* asanryam [wa] asatantya 

(3) [a]* pajjitabbarh-(It) should be reached, moved, or act of reach- 
ing, moving. [wa] pada+tabba 
[b]* pajjantyarh [wa] padataniya 


701 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


(4) [a]: kattabbam-(It) should be done, or act of doing. 
[wa] kara--tabba [b] ° karanryam [wa] karatanitya 
(5) [4] gantabbarh-(It) should be gone, or act of going. 
[wa] gamu-tabba [b] ° gamaniyam [wa] gamu-aniya 


५४१, ५५२. ण्यो च 
541, 552. Nyo Ca. [Nyotca. 2 words] 
[V] Bhava,kammesu sabbadhatühi nyapaccayo hoti. 


An affix “nya” is applied after all roots in the sense of both 
Bhava and Kamma voices. 

Note: Any word affixed with this “nya” affix is to be re- 
garded as belonging to Bhàva and Kamma sense verbs and 
nouns. 


(1) kattabbarh ® kariyam-(It) should be done or act of doing, an 
act. (Two translations, one as a verb, other as a verbal noun) 
[wa] kara*nya 

(2) jetabbarh * jeyyarh-(It) should be conquered or act of winning. 
[wa] ji*nya 

(3) netabbar ® neyyarh-(It) should be carried or act of carriage. 
(Sometimes it means “knowing”.) [wa] nr*nya 

icce'va'madi. 

Caggahanena teyyapaccayo hoti. 


By the word “ca” in Sutta, a “teyya” affix is similarly ap- 
plied (in the sense of Bhava and Kamma. This affix is also 
used either as verb or verbal noun). 
(1) atabbam-(should be) known. ® fiateyyam-it should be known 
or act of knowing. [wa] fia-teyya 
(2) ° dattheyyarh-it should be seen, or act of seeing. 
[wa] disat+teyya 
(3) * patteyyam-it should be reached, or act of reaching. 
[wa] pada+teyya 
icce'va'madi. [All are Kamma and Bhava sadhana EDs] 


Note: The Kita verbs such as “Kattabbam, jettabbam" etc. shown in 
front of the examples are EDs, not examples. 


702 


Kibbidhana Kappa 


५४२, ५५७. करम्हा रिच्च 

542, 557. Karamha ricca. [Karamha+ricca. 2 words] 

[V] Kara-icce’tamha dhatumha riccapaccayo hoti 
bhava,kammesu. 


An affix "ricca" is applied after the root “kara” in the sense 
of Bhava and Kamma. 


kattabbarh-(should be) done. ® kiccarh-something that should be 
done, i.e. a matter or a case or a duty to do. [Kamma-sadhana] 
[wa] kara*ricca. 


५४३, ५५५. भूतोब्ब 

543, 555. Bhuto’bba. [Bhtto+abba. 2 words] 

[V] Bhü-icce'taya dhatuya nyapaccayassa ükarena saha ab- 
ba'deso hoti bhavakammesu. 


An affix “nya” applied after the root “bhū” changes into 
“abba” together with component vowel “a” of the root in 
the Bhava and Kamma senses of the word. 

Summary: This Sutta changes the “a” of bhū and the affix 
“nya” into “abba’>bh+abba>bhabba. 


(1) bhavitabbo-(It should) be. * bhabbo-likely to happen, likely to 
occur. [wa] bhü*nya 

(2) bhavitabbam-(It should) be. ° bhabbam-possibly to happen, 
likely to occur. [Both Kamma and Bhava sadhana] [wa] bhü--nya 


703 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


५४४, ५५६. वदमदगमुयुजगरहाकारादीहि ज्जम्मग्गय्हेय्यागारो वा 

544, 556. Vada,mada,gamu,yuja,garaha'kara' dihi 
jjasmma,gga,yhe’yya’garo va. 
[Vada, mada, gamu, yuja, garaha, akara-adihi+jja, mma, gga, 
yha, eyyat+garotva. 4 words] 

[V] Vada,mada,gamu, yuja,garaha karanta-icce' va’ madihi 
dhatühi nyapaccayassa yathasankhyarh jja,mma,gga,yha, 
eyya’desa honti va dhatva’ntena saha, garassa ca garo hoti 
bhavakammesu. 


Translation of Sutta Vutti: 

[1] The affix “nya” applied after the roots “vada, mada, 
gamu, yuja, garaha", along with the last component 
consonants “d, m, j, h” of the roots, changes into “jja, 
mma, gga, yha respectively. 

[2] Also, the 4-of a-ending roots such as “da, pa, ha, ma, 
fia", together with affix “nya” applied after them, 
changes into an “eyya” and 

[3] the word “gara” of the root “garaha-to censure" changes 
into "gara" in cases of the words which are affixed with 
“nya” in Bhava and Kamma senses. 

[This Sutta has three functions. Please look at examples below careful- 

ly to clarify all the functions. Look at explanatory words shown inside 

parenthesis] 

The examples of d, m, j-ending roots: 

(d+nya>jja) 

(1) vattabbam-(that should be) said. 

* vajjam-something said, i.e. a fault to be censured or the talk. 
[wa] vada*nya 

(2) madaniyam-(that which causes) being drunk or inebriated. 

e majjam-liquor, narcotics. [wa] mada-nya 

(m+nya>mma) 

(1) gamaniyam-(It should be) gone. 

e gammarh-act of going or a place to be. [wa] gamu-*nya 


(jnya>gga) 


704 


Kibbidhana Kappa 


(1) yojantyarh-(It should be) bound or engaged. 
e yoggam-yoke, act of involvement. [wa] yujatnya 


The examples of h-ending root “garaha”: 
(h+nya>yha, gara>gara>garatyha. [2 functions for this word] 
(1) garahitabbarh-(that should be) censured. ® garayharh-deserving 
censure, i.e. an offence, a wrong-doing to be censured. 
[wa] garaha*nya 


The examples of a-ending roots: 

(atnya>eyya) 

(1) databbam-(that should be) given. * deyyam-something to give. 
[wa] da*nya 

(2) pàtabbam-(that which should be) drunk. ® peyyarh-something to 
drink, beverage. [wa] pà*nya 

(3) hatabbam-(that which should be) abandoned. ° heyyam- 
something to abandon. [wa] hanya 

(4) matabbarh-(that which should be) measured. meyyam- 
something to measure. [wa] ma+nya 

(5) atabbam-(that which should be) known. ® fieyyam-something 
to know. [wa] fia*nya 

icce'va'madi. [All are Kamma-sadhana EDs] 


५४५, ५४८. ते किच्चा 

545, 548. Te kiccā. [Te+kicca. 2 words] 

[V] Ye paccaya tabba’dayo ricca’nta, te kiccasafifia'ti 
veditabba. 


Those affixes starting from “tabba” up to “ricca” are to be 
formally known as “kicca affixes”. 
Kiccasafifiaya kimpayojanam? 
Bhavakammesu kiccaktakhattha. 
What is the benefit by terming “kicca’’? 
It has the benefit of making due reference in Suttas such as 
“Bhavakammesu kiccaktakhattha” etc. 
Note: tabba, antya, nya, teya, ricca, these five affixes are called 


705 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 
Kicca affixes. 


५४६, ५६२. अञ्जे कित्‌ 
546, 562. Afifie kit. [Afifietkit. 2 words] 
[V] Aññe paccaya kit-eva saññā honti. 


All the remaining other affixes (shown in this Kita section) 
are to be formally termed "Kita affixes". 


Kit-safifiaya kim payojanam? Kattari kit. 
What is the benefit by terming "kit"? 
It has the benefit of making due reference in such Suttas as 
“Kattari Kit" etc. 
Note: Below is a list of Kita-affixes: 
na, a, nvu, tu, avi, kvi, ramma, ni, yu, ru, nuka, ra, i, ti, ririya, 
ta, tavantu, tavi, ina, kha, tave, tum, tuna, tvana, tva, mana, anta, 
ratthu, ritu, ratu, tuka, ika, kara. (33 affixes) 


५४७, ५९६. नन्दादीहि यु 
547, 590. Nanda'dihi yu. [Nanda-adihityu. 2 words] 
[V] Nanda'dihi dhatühi yupaccayo hoti bhava,kammesu. 


The “yu” affix is applied after the root “nanda” etc, in the 
senses of Bhava and Kamma. 
(1) (a) nandtyate-act of liking. ° nandanath-act of liking, 
the pleasure (Bhava Sadhana ED) [wa] nandat+yu 
(b) nanditabbam-(that which should be) pleased. và 
* nandanam-something which should be pleased with, being 
pleasant or such a thing. (Kamma Sadhana ED) [wa] nanda+yu 
(2) gahaniyam-(that which should be) taken. * gahanam-something 
to take, act of grabbing. [wa] gahat+yu 
(3) caritabbam-(that which should be) practiced. ® caranam- 


something to practice, the practice of Dhamma etc. [wa] caratyu 
[All are Bhava & Kamma-sadhana EDs which use Akhyata and Kita 
verbs] 


Evam sabbattha yojetabba. 


706 


Kibbidhana Kappa 


५४८, ५९७. कत्तुकरणपदेसेसु च 
548, 597. Kattu,karana,padesesu ca. 
[Kattu, karana, padesesu+ca. 2 words] 
[V] Kattu,karana,padesa-icce tesva'tthesu ca yupaccayo 
hoti. 


The “yu” affix is also applied in the senses of kattu (agent), 
karana (instrumental) and padesa (locative). 


Kattari tava—(Here is) the example in the Kattu (subject, agent) 
sense: 


(1) rajam-the dust. harat?’ ti [harati+iti] harati-(it) removes. iti 
e rajoharanarh-the dust-remover. toyam-the water (is to be re- 
garded as such). In some cases, it refers to handkerchief or a napkin. 
[Kattu-sadhana] [wa] raja-saddiipapadatharatyu 

Karane tava—(Here is) the example in the karana (instrumental) 

sense: 

(2) karoti-(it) does (to finish). tena’ ti [tena+iti] tena-by means of 
that cause. iti * karanarh-a supporting cause, a means or an in- 
strument by which actions are accomplished. [Karana-sadhana ED] 
[wa] kara+yu 

Padese tava—(Here is) the example in the padesa (locative) sense: 

(3) titthanti-(they) stand. tasmin'ti [tasmirh+iti] tasmim-at that 
point. iti * thanam-point or location on which things stand or 
exist. 

[wa] thā+yu [Adhikarana-sadhana ED. 

Note: The term “padesa” in Sutta means adhikarana. Sometimes also 

called as *okasa" or *adhara". These four terms refer to “locative”. 


Evam sabbattha yojetabba-This way, it should be applied at all 
applicable instances. 


707 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


५४९, ५५०. रहादितो ण 
549, 550 Ra,ha'dito na. [Ra, ha-adito*na. 2 words] 
[V] Rakara,hakaradya’ntehi dhatühi ana’desassa nassa no hoti. 


The “n” of morpheme “ana” derived from affix “yu”, 
which has been applied after “r, h-ending roots", usually 
changes into an “p”. 

Summary: This Sutta enjoins the morpheme “n” of “ana” 
to be changed into an “n”. [So, it becomes an “ana”]. The rule 
is applicable after r, h-ending roots only. The *ana" func- 
tion is applied by Sutta 622. The function of Sutta is slight- 
ly similar to the function of Sutta “ma नोणः समानपदे? in the 
Panini Sanskrit grammar. [See the applied *n" shown in bold in 
the examples below] 


(1) karoti tena'ti ® karamarh. [wa] karat+yu [Re: The previous 
Sutta] 

(2) püreti-(causes) to fill. tena’ ti [tenatiti] tena-by that. iti 
e puraparh-an addition which causes to fill. [wa] püratyu 

(3) gahaniyam-(should be) taken. tena’ti ° gahanarh-the cause of 
grabbing. [wa] gahatyu [All are Karana-sadhana EDs 

Eva’maniie’pi yojetabba-Thus, other examples should be applied. 


Iti “kibbidhanakappe pathamo kando. 
The First Section of Kita ends. 


24 Kibbidhana-Kita-of those Kita-suffixed words--vidhana-plan, section. 
“ta” is elided with one more “b” being augmented. 


708 


Kibbidhana Kappa 


Dutiya Kanda 


The Second Section 


५५०, ५४६. णादयो तेकालिका 
550, 546. Na’dayo tekalika. 
[Na-adayo+tekalika. 2 words] 
[V] Na’dayo paccaya yupaccaya’nta tekalika'ti veditabba. 


The affixes starting from “na” to “yu” are to be known as 

"tekalika" which means belonging to three tenses. 

Note: Please carefully see the EDs of the examples. AII 

numbered verbs in three tenses signify three tenses of those 

affixes. WA of examples are already shown in the first sec- 
tion. [Tekalika=ti-three+kala-time+nika-relating to, “e” is a vuddhi- 
vowel, i.e. the affixes whose meanings are related to three tenses] 

(1) kumbharh-the pot. H! karoti-makes (this present verb signifies 
present). 21 akasi-made (this signifies past). °! karissati’ti [ka 
rissatititi] (this signifies future) karissati-will make. iti-therefo- 
re, kumbhakaro-is so called. ° kumbhakaro-the potter who 
makes the pot (at present), who made the pot (in the past), who will 
make the pot (in the future). 

(2) !! karoti ?! akasi ©! karissati tena’ ti [tena+iti] tena-by that 
cause. iti ® karanarh-a supporting cause or an instrument by which 
actions are accomplished at present, had been accomplished in the 
past and will also be accomplished in the future. (To understand the 


tenses of verbs, refer to the relevant Suttas in the first section of 
Akhyata) 


NS _9 


Eva’ mafifie’pi yojetabba-Thus, other examples should be applied. 


५५१, ५९८. सञ्ञायं दाधातो इ 
551, 598. Safifiayam dadhato i. 
[Safifiayarh+da,dha,to+i. 3 words] 
[V] Saüfiaya'mabhidheyyayam dadhato i-paccayo hoti. 
When denoting a name (proper noun), an “i” affix is to be 
applied after the root da and dha. 


709 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


(1) pathamarh-initially. Adtyat?’ti [adiyatititi] adiyati-(is) taken. 
iti ° adi-something taken initially, a beginning, an inception, a 
starting point. [Kamma-sadhana] [wa] āv-dā+i 

(2) udakam-water. dadhatr'ti [dadhāti+iti] dadhāti-(it) carries. iti 
e udadhi-that which carries water, an ocean. 

[wa] udaka-saddūpapada-dhā+i 

(3) maho’ dakàani [mahā-great+udakāni-waters]-the great (amount 
of) water. dadhatr'ti « mahodadhi-that which carries great 
(amount of) water, an ocean. [Both 2, 3 are Kattu-sadhana EDs] 
[wa] mahodaka-saddüpapada-dha--i 

(4) valani-hairs. dadhati-(it) carries. tasmin’ti [tasmirn+iti] 
tasmim-in that tail. 1t1 * valadhi-the body part where it carries 
hairs, the tail of an animal. [Adhikarana-sadhana] 

[wa] vala-saddupapada-dhadi 

(5) samma-well. dhiyati'ti [dhiyati+iti] dhtyati-(is) kept combined. 
iti * sandhi-act of combining well. [Kamma-sadhana] 
[wa] sam V-dhà-i 


५५२, ६०९. ति कित्‌ aris 
552, 609. Ti kit ca’sitthe. 
[Tit+kit+ca+asitthe. 4 words] 
[V] Saüfiaya'mabhidheyyayam sabbadhatühi ti-paccayo hoti, 
kit ca asitthe. 


When denoting the name (proper noun) with an expression 
of well-wishes, a “ti” affix as well as other “kita” affixes 
are applied after the roots denoting the proper noun. 


(1) jino-Buddha. enarh-that person. bujjhatü'ti [bujjhatu+iti] 
bujjhatu-let be known! iti-for this reason. jinabuddhi-is so 
called. ® jinabuddhi-the name “Jinabuddhi” meaning “may the 
Buddha know him". [wa] Jina-saddüpapada-budha-ti 

(2) dhanam-wealth. assa-for that son. bhavatü'ti [bhavatu+iti] 
bhavatu-may there be! iti * dhanabhüti-the name “dhanabhiti” 
meaning “may he be prosperous or wealthy". 

[wa] dhana-saddüpapada-bhü--ti 


710 


Kibbidhana Kappa 


(3) Bhavatü'ti [bhavatu+iti] bhavatu-may there be. iti * bhüto-the 
name “bhiito” meaning “may be, i.e. grow". [wa] bhū+ta 

(4) bhavatü'ti * bhavo-the name “bhavo”. [wa] bhū+ņa 

(5) dhammo-the Dhamma. enath-to that person. dadatü'ti 
[dadatu+iti] dadatu-may give (happiness)! iti. 
* dhammadinno-the name “Dhammadinno” meaning “may the 
Dhamma give him (happiness)”. 
[wa] dhamma-saddipapada-da+ta 

(6) vaddhatü'ti [Vaddhatu-iti] vaddhatu-May he prosper! iti 
e vaddhamano-the name so-called meaning “prosperous”. 
[wa] vaddha+mana 


waw yg 


Eva’maññe’pi yojetabba. 


५५३, ५९९. इत्थिय मतियवो वा 
553, 599. Itthiya' matiyavo va. 


[Itthiyam-a, ti, yu, votva. 3 words] 
[V] Itthiya'mabhidheyyayam sabbadhatühi akara,ti,yu-icce’te 
paccaya honti va. 
The affixes “a, ti, yu" are sometimes applied after the roots 
and such “a, ti, yu-affixed words” belong to feminine gen- 
der. 
Note: Only affix “ti” is of permanent feminine gender. The 
“a, yu" affixes applied through other Suttas can also be of 
variable genders. 
[a-affix] Jiratr tī [jirati+iti] Jirati-(it) degenerates. iti ® jara-that 
which degenerates, decaying, the old-age. [wa] jarata 
[ti-affix] mafnfatt’ ti [Mafifiati+iti] mafifiati-(It) thinks. iti ° mati- 
that which thinks, thought, view, opinion. [wa] mana-ti 
[yu-affix] (1) cetayatr' ti [Cetayati+iti] cetayati-(it) motivates. iti 
* cetana-that which motivates, motive, volition, intent. 
[wa] citityu 
(2) vedayati'ti [Vedayati+iti] vedayati-(it) feels. iti 
* vedana-that which feels, feeling. 
[All Kattu-sadhana EDs] [wa] vidat+yu 


waw yg 


Eva’maññe’pi yojetabba. 


711 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


५५४, ६०१. करतो रिरिय 

554, 601. Karato ririya. [Karato-ririya. 2 words] 

[V] Karato itthiya’manitthiyam và abhidheyyayam 
ririya-paccayo hoti va. 


The affix “ririya”, which may be of feminine gender or not, 
is sometimes applied after the root “kara”. 


(1) kattabba-(it) should be done. ® kiriyà-an action. 
[Feminine gender word] [wa] karatririya 

(2) karantyarh-(it) should be done. * kiriyarh-an action. [Neuter 
gender word] [Both Kamma-sadhana EDs] [wa] karatririya 


५५५, ६१२. अतीते त तवन्तु तावी 
555, 612. Atite ta,tavantu,tavi. 
[Atite+ta, tavantu, tavi. 2 words] 
[V] Atite kale sabbadhatühi ta,tavantu,tavi-icce'te paccaya 
honti. 


The affixes “ta, tavantu, tavr" are applied after all roots in 
the sense of past. 
Note: The affixes applied by this Sutta usually signify a 
past tense. So, any word affixed with these “ta, tavantu, 
tavr" affixes are to be regarded as belonging to past perfect 
verbs and verbal nouns. These affixes are also referred to as 
“past participles". [See three pairs of examples for each affix in 
three roots] 
(1) (a) * huto. [wa] hu+ta 

(b) * hutava. [wa] hu+tavantu 

(c) * hutavi-given, sacrificed. [wa] hu--tavi 
(2) (a) ° vusito. [wa] vasatta 

(b) * vusitava. [wa] vasattavantu 

(c) * vusitavi-lived. [wa] vasa+tavi 
(3) (a) * bhutto, [wa] bhujatta 


712 


Kibbidhana Kappa 


(b) * bhuttava [wa] bhuja+tavantu 
(c) * bhuttavi-eaten. [wa] bhuja+tavi 


५५६, ६२२. भावकम्मेसु त 
556, 622. Bhava,kammesu ta. 
[Bhava, kammesu-ta. 2 words] 
[V] Bhava,kammesu atite kale tapaccayo hoti sabbadhatühi. 


The affix “ta” is applied in the sense of Bhava (action), 

Kamma (passive voice) and past tense. 

Note: Any word affixed with this “ta” affix is to be regarded as having 

either Bhava or Kamma sense (passive voice verb) or past tense verbs 

according to context. 

Bhave tava—(Here are) examples in the sense of Bhava. 

(1) tassa-of that person. (this word in genitive case signifies Bhava- 
sense of the example). * gitatn-singing, i.e. The singing act of that 
person. [Wa] ge+ta 

(2) ° naccam-dancing. [wa] natat+ta 

(3) * nattam-dancing. [wa] nata--ta (2 words of the same root but 
different word-forms) 

(4) * hasitam-laughing. [wa] hasa-ta 

Kammani tava—(Here are) examples in the sense of Kamma (pas- 

sive voice). 

(1) tena-by that person. (this word in instrumental case signifies Kam- 
ma-sense of the example, indicative of non-principal subject). 

e bhasitam-is said, i.e. said by that person. [wa] bhasatta 

(2) * desitam-is taught or proclaimed. [wa] disa+ta 


५५७, ६०६. बुधगमादित्थे कत्तरि 
557, 606. Budha,gama'ditthe kattari. 
[Budha, gamu-adi-atthe+kattari. 2 words] 
[V] Budha,gamu-icce'va' madihi dhatühi ta’ datthe 
gamyamane tapaccayo hoti kattari sabbakale. 


The affix “ta” is applied after the roots “budha, gamu” etc. 
in the sense of Katta (an active voice) at all tense modes. 


713 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


Note: Any word affixed with this “ta” affix is to be regard- 
ed as belonging to Kattu-sense, active voice verb. 


(1) sabbe-all. sankhata’ sankhate-the conditioned and uncondi- 
tioned. dhamme-phenomena. !!! bujjhati-knows. ©] abujjhi- 
knew. P! bujjhissatr' ti [bujjhissati+iti] bujjhissati-will know. 
iti-therefore. Buddho-is called Buddha. * Buddho-the one who 
knows, who knew and who will know all conditioned and uncondi- 
tioned phenomena, the Buddha. [Kattu-sadhana ED] 

[wa] budha+ta 

(2) ° sarana’ngato-the one who went/goes/will go to refuge. 
[wa] sarana-saddüpapada gamutta 

(3) * samatha'ngato-the one who attained/attains/will attain peace. 
[wa] samatha-saddüpapada gamu--ta 

(4) * amata" ngato-the one who attained/attains/will attain amata 
(deathlessness). [wa] amata-saddüpapada gamutta 

(5) !! janati-(He) knows. 21 ajani-knew. 21 janissat? ti [janis- 
sati*iti] Janissati-will know. iti ® fiato-the one who knows, knew, 
will know. [Kattu-sadhana] [wa] ñā+ta 
icce’va’madi. 

Note: The numbered three verbs in the ED indicate all three 

tense modes of the words affixed with “ta”. 

In view of Suttas 555, 556 and 557, it should be noted that 

there are four senses of Pali words affixed with a “ta”. 

They are: 

(1) Atita (past), (2) the Bhava (impersonal voice), (3) Kamma 

(Passive voice) and (4) Kattu (Active voice). Knowing this basic 

fact will help in the understanding of Pali texts and words 

suffixed with this “ta” affix. 


५५८, ६०२. जितो इन सब्बत्थ 
558, 602. Jito ina sabbattha. [Jito--ina*sabbattha. 3 words] 
[V] Ji-iccetaya dhatuya ina-paccayo hoti sabbakale kattari. 


८८५५११ 


An "ina" affix is applied after the root "ji" in the sense of 
Katta in all tenses. 


714 


Kibbidhana Kappa 


(1) papake-evil. akusale-unwholesome. dhamme-phenomena. 
11] jinati-subjugates. 21 ajini-subjugated. P! jinissati’ ti [jinis- 
sati iti] Jinissati-will subjugate. iti-therefore. jino-is called jina. 
* jino-the one who subjugates, subjugated and will subjugate the 
evil, bad, unwholesome mental states, Buddha, the victor of evil. 
[Kattu-sadhana ED] [wa] jitina 


५५९, ६०३. सुपतो च 
559, 603. Supato Ca. [Supato+ca. 2 words] 
[V] Supa-iccetaya dhatuya inapaccayo hoti kattari,bhave ca. 


A similar “ina” affix is applied after the root “supa” in the 
sense not only of Katta but also of bhava. 


(1) (a) supatt’ ti [supati+iti] supati-(it) sleeps. iti-therefore. 
e supinarh-dream, (seen while sleeping) [Kattu-sadhana]. 
(b) supiyate-act of sleeping. * Supinarh-sleep. 
[Bhava-sadhana ED] [wa] supat+ina 


५६०, ६०४, ईसंदुसूहि ख 
560, 604.Isam,du,sü,hi kha. 
_ [Isarh, du, sū, hitkha. 2 words] 
[V] Isam,du,su-sadda'dihi sabbadhatühi khapaccayo hoti. 


A “kha” affix is applied after the roots prefixed with 
Upasagga and Nipata particles such as “Tsar (small, little), 
du (badly), su (well)". 
Note: The affix “kha” is only a kh-conjoined affix “a”. So, only “a” 
will be shown in WA as the actual affix in the examples below. 
Examples in the root “si” 
(1) * Isassayo-little-sleeping, a nap. [wa] Isarh-saddhipapada, sita 
(2) * dussayo-badly-sleeping, bad sleep. [wa] duvVsit+a 
(3) * sussayo-well-sleeping. bhavata-by your honorable [This word 
in instrumental case signifies bhava and kamma senses of the affix 
and all these Kita-verbs and verbal nouns affixed with it] 
[wa] suVsita 


715 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


Examples in the root “kara” 

(1) 1sakkararh-little-doing. [one “k” augmented] 
[wa] Isarh-saddhipapada, karat+a 

(2) * dukkaram-being not easy to do, badly-done, hard to do. 
[one *k" augmented] [wa] duVkarata 

(3) न sukararh-easily done, well-done, bhavata-by your honorable. 
[wa] suVkarat+a 


५६१, ६३६. THAT समानकत्तुकेसु तवेतुं वा 
561, 636. Iccha'tthesu samanakattukesu tave,tum 
va. 
[Iccha-atthesu+samanakattukesu+tave, turh+vā. 4 words] 
[V] Iccha’tthesu samanakattukesu sabbadhatühi 
tave,tumicce'te paccaya honti sabbakale kattari. 


When expressing “wish” or “purpose” in a sentence having 
one same Katta (subject), the affixes “tave”, "tum" are ap- 
plied after all roots in all tenses. 


(1) pufifiani-meritorious deeds. ® katave-to do, i.e. for the purpose 
of doing meritorious deeds. [wa] kara+tave 

(2) saddhammarh-the noble teachings. ® sotu’micchati 
[sotur-icchati] soturh-to listen. icchati-(he) wants. i.e. He wants 
to listen to the Dhamma. [wa] su+turh 


५६२, ६३८. अरहसक्कादीसु च 
562, 638. Araha,sakka’disu ca. 
[Araha, sakka-adisu+ca. 2 words] 
[V] Araha,sakka'disu ca atthesu sabbadhatühi tum-paccayo 
hoti. 


When expressing worthiness and ability, the affix “turn” is 
applied after all roots. 
(1) ko-who. tarh-to that person, him. ° ninditum’ arahati [nin- 
ditum-arahati] ninditurh-to blame. arahati-deserves? 
i.e. Who deserves to blame that person? [wa] ninda+tum 


716 


Kibbidhana Kappa 


(2) sakkà-can be. * jeturh-to conquer. dhanena-by wealth. và-also. 
i.e. It may be possible to conquer by means of wealth also. 
[wa] ji-*tum 

Eva'maífie'pi yojetabba. 


५६३, ६३९. पत्तवचने अलमत्येसु च 
563, 639. Pattavacane ala? matthesu ca. 
[Pattavacane-*alam, atthesu+ca. 3 words] 
[V] Pattavacane alama'tthesu sabbadhatühi tum-paccayo 
hoti. 


To express “appropriateness” to do something, which is one 
of the meanings of the word "alam", an affix “turn” is ap- 
plied after all roots. 

Summary: This Sutta enjoins to apply "tum" affix after all roots of the 

verb used in the context of “alarh” which has the meaning of suitability 

and appropriateness. 

(1) ala" meva [alarh+eva] alarh-(is) appropriate. eva-only. danani- 
alms. * daturh-to offer, i.e. It is only appropriate to offer alms (as 
it can enrich one in many ways). [wa] da+turh 

(2) ala? meva [alarhteva] alam eva pufifiani-meritorious deeds. 

e katurh-to do, i.e. It is fitting or suitable to do meritorious deeds 
(as it can lead to wholesome results). [wa] karat+turh 


५६४, ६४०. पुब्बकाठे ककत्तुकानं तुनत्वानत्वा वा 
564, 640. Pubbakale'kakattukanam tuna,tvana,tva 
va. 
[Pubbakale+ekakattukanam-+tuna, tvana, tvat+va. 4 words] 
[V] Pubbakale ekakattukanam dhatünam 
tuna,tvana,tva-icce’te paccaya honti va. 


To express concurrent actions of a single doer, one being a 
preceding action and the other being next subsequent ac- 
tion, the affixes “tuna, tvana, tva” are sometimes applied 


after the root (of the verb denoting the preceding action). 
Note: The verbs suffixed with these three affixes applied by this Sutta 
are called “gerund or absolutive” which have no gender. 


717 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


(1) ° katuna-having done, [the preceding action]. kammarh-work. 
gacchati-(he) goes [the subsequent action], i.e. He goes (after) 
having done work. [wa] kara--tuna 

(2) ° akatuna-not having done (“a” is a morpheme of negative particle 
“na” which means “not”). pufifiam-meritorious deed. kilissanti- 
will suffer, i.e. (He) will suffer for not having done meritorious 
deeds. [wa] na-Vkara+tuna 

(3) satta-living beings. ® sutvana-having heard. dhammarh-the 
Dhamma. modanti-are delighted, i.e. having heard Dhamma, the 
living beings are delighted. [wa] su+tvana 

(4) ripum-the enemy. * jitvana-having conquered. vasati-(he) lives, 
i.e. Having conquered the enemy, (he) lives. [wa] ji*tvana 

(5) dhammarh-Dhamma. ® sutvana'ssa [sutvanatassa] sutvana- 
having heard. assa-of that person. eta' dahosi [etam-ahosi] 
etam-this (thought). ahosi-was, arose, i.e. having heard Dhamma, 
this thought arose in him (in his mind). [wa] sut+tvana 

(6) ito-from this place. * sutvana-having heard. amutra-at that 
place, there. kathayanti-(they) say, i.e. having heard here, they 
say there (what they heard). [wa] sut+tvana 

(7) * sutvà-after having heard. janissama-(we) must know, i.e. We 
must know (how to respond) (only after) having heard (from you). 
[wa] sut+tva 

Evam sabbattha yojetabba. 


५६५, ६४६. वत्तमाने मानन्ता 
565, 646. Vattamane mana’nta. 
[Vattamane+mana, anta. 2 words] 
[V] Vattamane Kale sabbadhatühi mana,anta-icce’te paccaya 
honti. 


To express an on-going action being done or still taking 
place at present, (i.e. as yet unfinished action), the affixes 
“mana” or "anta" are applied after all roots. 

Note: These two affixes are often referred to as the present 
participle and play various roles in a sentence. 


718 


Kibbidhana Kappa 


[mana affix] ° saramano-while remembering. rodati-(he) cries. 
[wa] sara--a--mana (two affixes) 

[anta affix] ° gacchanto-while going. ganhati-(he) takes or grabs. 
[wa] gamu-anta 


५६६, ५७४. सासादीहि रत्थु 
566, 574. Sasa'dihi ratthu. [Sasa-adihi-ratthu. 2 words] 
[V] Sasa-icce’va’madthi dhatuhi ratthupaccayo hoti. 


The affix *ratthu" is applied after the roots “sāsa” etc. 


(a) sasat1'ti [Sasati+iti] sasati-(he) teaches. iti * sattha-the one 
who teaches, the teacher. 

(b) sasati himsatr ti [hirhsati+iti] himsati-(he) hurts defilements. iti 
và ® sattha-the one who hurts the defilements, Buddha who hurts 
defilements. [Kattu-sadhana ED] [wa] sasatratthu 

Note: In the second ED, the verb “hirhsati” is another possible mean- 

ing of the previous verb *sasati". It means that the root word *sasa" in 

the verb “sasati” does not only mean to teach, but it also means to hurt, 

as shown by another verb *himsati". Such explanation by means of a 

substitute verb of different meaning or the same meaning will be fre- 

quently found in the EDs of forthcoming sections of Kita and Unadi 


chapters. The students need to be familiar with such explanatory verbs 
and words in the EDs. 


५६७, ५७५. पातितो रितु 
567, 575. Pa'ti'to ritu. [Patito*ritu. 2 words] 
[V] Pa-icce’taya dhatuya ritu-paccayo hoti. 


cn??? 


The affix “ritu” is applied after the root “pa”. 


pati-(One) protects. puttan ti [puttarn+iti] puttarh-son or offspring. 
iti * pità-the one who protects one’s offspring, the father. 
[Kattu-sadhana ED] [wa] pa+ritu 


719 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


५६८, ५७६. मानादीहि रातु 

568, 576. Mana'dihi ratu. [Mana-adihi+ratu. 2 words] 

[V] Mana-icce’va’madthi dhatühi ratu-paccayo hoti, 
ritu-paccayo ca. 


The affix “rātu”, as well as the affix "ritu", is applied after 
the roots “mana” etc. 


(1) dhammena-justly. puttarh-son or offspring. maneti’ti 
[maneti+iti] maneti-adores. iti ® mata-the one who justly adores 
(her) offspring, the mother. [wa] mana-ratu 

(2) pubbe-before (other young siblings). bhasatr'ti [bhasati- iti] 
bhasati-speaks. iti * bhata-the one who speaks (first before other 
young siblings) i.e. Brother. [Both Kattu-sadhana] 

[wa] bhasa-ratu 

(3) matapitühi-by mother and father. dhartryati'ti [dhariyatititi] 
dhariyati-(is) carried or protected. iti  dhita-the one protected by 
mother and father. i.e. a daughter. [Kamma-sadhana] 

[wa] dhara+ritu 


५६९, ६१०. आगमा तुको 
569, 610. Agama tuko. [Agama+tuko. 2 words] 
[V] A-icca’dimha gamito tukapaccayo hoti. 
The affix “tuka” is applied after the root “gamu” prefixed 
with an upasagga particle “a”. 
agacchatt’ti [Agacchati+iti] agacchati-(he) comes (to visit). iti 
e agantuko-the one who comes (to visit). bhikkhu-the guest monk. 


[Kattu-sadhana] [wa] a-Vgamuttuka 
Note: Any guest is also implied by the word. 


720 


Kibbidhana Kappa 


५७०, ६११. भब्बे इक 
570, 611. Bhabbe ika. [Bhabbe+ika. 2 words] 
[V] Gamu-icce'tamha dhatumha ikapaccayo hoti bhabbe. 


The affix “ika” is applied after the root “gamu” in the 
sense of expressing a future possibility or prospect. 


[1] gamissati-will go. [2] gantum-to go (on a trip). bhabbo'ti 
[bhabbo+iti] bhabbo-is likely. iti ° gamiko-the one who will go or 
who is likely (be going on a trip). the would-be-traveler, the tourist. 
bhikkhu-the traveler monk is here to be known as a “gamiko”. 

[wa] gamutika 

Note: Any traveler is also implied by the word. The numbered verb and 
phrases indicate two possible EDs of this word. 


Iti kibbidhanakappe dutiyo kando. 
The Second Section of Kita ends. 


721 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


Tatiya Kanda 
The Third Section 


५७१, ६२४. पच्चयादनिठ्ठा निपातना सिज्झन्ति 
571, 624. Paccaya’danittha nipatana sijjhanti. 
[Paccaya-anittha-nipatana-sijjhanti. 4 words] 
[V] Saünkhya,nama,samasa,taddhita' khyata,kitakappamhi 
sappaccaya ye sadda anittha'ngata, te sadhanena 
ni rakkhitva sakehi sakehi nàmehi nipatana sijjhanti. 


Any uncompleted word of Sankhya (numerical nouns), or 
Nama (noun words), or Samasa (compound noun words), or 
Taddhita (nouns in Taddhita affixes), or Akhyata (verbs), or 
Kita (nouns in Kita affixes), all those words can be comple- 
ted by means of this great Sutta. 


Some functions on Numerical Nouns 
Saünkhyayar tava-—First, are some examples of numerical 
nouns (which can also be completed by this Sutta). 
(1) ekassa eka hoti. dasassa ca dakarassa rakara’deso hoti. 


The numerical word *eka-one" becomes “eka”. The syl- 
lable “d” of the word “dasa-ten” changes into “r”. 

eko ca-one also. dasa ca-ten also. * ekarasa-one and ten, 

i.e. eleven. 

(2) dvissa ba hoti. dasassa ca dakarassa rakara’deso hoti. 
The numerical word “dvi-two” becomes “ba”. The syl- 
lable “d” of the word “dasa-ten” changes into “r”. 
dve ca-two also. dasa ca * barasa-two and ten, i.e. twelve. 

(3) dvissa ba hoti. dasassa ca visam hoti. 

The numerical word “dvi-two” becomes “ba”. The word 
“dasa-ten” changes into "visam". 

dve ca-two also. visafica [visarn*ca] visam ca-twenty also. 

* bavisarh-two and twenty, i.e. twenty-two. 

(4) chassa so hoti. dasassa ca dakarassa lo hoti. 

The numerical word “cha-six” becomes “so”. The syl- 


722 


Kibbidhana Kappa 


lable “d” of the word “dasa-ten” changes into “P. 
cha ca-six also. dasa ca * solasa-six and ten, i.e. sixteen. 


(5) cha-ayatanamhi chassa salo 11011. 
In the example word *cha-ayatana", the numerical 
word “cha-six” becomes “sala”. 
e salayatanam-six base. 
Evam sesa sankhya katabba. 
Thus, the remaining numerical nouns should be applied. 
Note: The functions for most of these examples are already 
shown in relevant Suttas in the Sankhya Taddhita section. 


Some functions on Nouns 
Namike tava-Here are some examples of nouns. 
ima,samana,apara-iccetehi jja,jju-paccaya honti. 
ima, samana-saddanari’ca akara, sakara' desa honti. 
The “jja, jju” affixes are applied after the words ima (this), 
samana (similar) and apara (other). Besides, “ima” changes 
into “a” and “samana” changes into "sa". 


(1) imasmim kale-at this time. * ajja, * ajju-at this time, 
i.e. today. [wa] ajja=imatjja [wa] ajju-ima-jju 
(2) samane kale-at the same time. * sajja, * sajju-at the same time, 
at once, simultaneously. 
[wa] sajja-samaàna-3ja [wa] sajju=samāna+jju 
(3) aparasmim kale-at other time. * aparajja, * aparajju-the oth- 
er day, on the following day. 
[wa] aparajja=aparatjja [wa] aparajju=aparadiju 
Note: The words affixed with “jja, jju” are indeclinable, 
which have no gender nor number except that it signifies a 
locative sense. The words “imasmirh kale” etc. are EDs for 
the examples. 


723 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


Some functions on Compound Nouns 
Samase tàva-Here are some examples of compound nouns. 
* bhümigato. * apayagato. * issarakatam. ० sallaviddho. 
e kathinadussam. ० corabhayam. ° dhafifiarasi. 
e samsaradukkharm. [Tappurisa compounds] 
e pubba’ pararh-front and back (This is a Dvanda compound). 
[Pubbañ’ ca aparafi'ca Pubba’ param ED]. 


Some functions on Taddhita-nouns 

Taddhite tava—Here are some examples of Taddhita nouns. 
e vasittho. ° bharadvajo. ° bhaggavo. ° pandavo. ® kaleyyo. 
Note: All examples shown in Samasa and Taddhita section of this Sutta 
have been already shown in their respective Suttas of the relevant chap- 
ters. The purpose of showing again here by the great grammarian is to 
show that these words too can be completed by means of this great Sut- 
ta wherever necessary by invoking necessary morphological proce- 
dures. 


Some functions on Akhyata-Verbs 
Akhyate tava-Here are some examples of Akhyata (verbs). 
*asa bhave" ti dhatuto vattamanesu ekavacana, bahuva- 
canesu ekavacanassa tissa sso hoti antena saha, bahuva- 
canassa antissa ssu hoti antena saha. 


The Vattamana singular vibhatti “ti” applied after the root 
“asa-to be", changes into “ssa” while the plural vibhatti “an- 
ti" changes into “ssu” together with last component word 
“sa” of the root. [ti>ssa, anti>ssu.] 


(1) eva'* massa [evarnt+assa] Evam-thus. assa-should be. 
vacantyo-said, i.e. it should be said thus. [wa] assa=asa+ti 

(2) eva'* massu [evam-assu] evam assu-should be, pl. 
vacantya, pl. [wa] assu=asat+anti 





Anattiyam hissa ssu hoti và. 
In expression of command, the paficami vibhatti “hi” is 
substituted with “ssu” sometimes. 


* gacchassu-go. * gacchahi-go. (The second is inapplicable 
example). [wa] gamuthi (Both are the same) 


724 


Kibbidhana Kappa 


Some functions on Kita-nouns 
Kitake tava— Here are some examples of nouns in Kita- 
affixes. 


vada,hana-icce’va’madthi dhatühi kapaccayo hoti. 
An affix "ka" is applied after the roots “wada-to speak" and 
“hana-to kill”. 


vadassa ca vado hoti. 

The root “vada” becomes “vada”. 
hanassa ca ghato hoti. 

The root “hana” becomes “ghata”’. 


(1) ° vadako-speaker. [wa] vada+ka [No “nvu” affix in these 
words | 

(2) ° ghatako-killer. [wa] hanat+ka 

Note: These two examples can also be completed by applying “pvu” 

affix as per the standard morphological procedures prescribed in Suttas 

527, 622. 


Natadhatuto tapaccayassa cca,tta’desa honti antena saha. 


Also, the affix “ta”, applied after the root “nata-to dance”, 
changes into “cca and tta" along with the last consonant “t” 
of the root. 

* naccam-dancing. * nattam-dancing. [wa] nata+ta (two different 
word-forms of the same meaning & the same basic structure) 

Icce'va' madayo nipatana sijjhanti. 

Such example of words can be completed by means of this 
Sutta. 


725 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


५७२, ६२५. सासदिसतो तस्स RÀ च 
572, 625. Sasa,disato tassa rittho ca. 
[Sasa, disa-to+tassa+ritthot+ca. 4 words] 
[V] Sasa,disa-icce’ va’ madihi dhatühi tapaccayassa rittha'deso 
hoti thane. 


The affix “ta” applied after the roots “5954, disa” etc. 
changes into “rittha” at some appropriate instances of 
words. 


(1) ° anusittho-(have) instructed. SO-that person. xd a-by me. 
i.e. That person was instructed by me. [wa] anu-Vsasatta 

(2) ° dittharh-(have) seen. me-by me. rüpamr-the sight, i.e. The 
sight was seen by me. [wa] disatta 


Caggahanena kiccatakarassa ca turh-paccayassa ca rattha, 
ratthum, adesa honti. 
By means of “ca” in Sutta, “ta” of tabba affix and the 


whole “turh-affix” changes into “rattha, ratthum". 
Note: (a) “ta” of tabba>rattha> ratthabba, 
(b) turh>ratthum. 
(See the examples below. The function is shown in bold. The “r” is de- 
leted by Sutta 539) 


(1) dassantyarh-(should be) seen or known. * datthabbarh-should 
see or know. [wa] datthabbarh=disa+tabba 

(2) ° datthurh-to see. vihararh-to the temple. gacchanti-(they) go. 
samananam-the monks, i.e. (They) go to the temple in order to 
see the monks. [wa] datthurh=disat+tum 


726 


Kibbidhana Kappa 


५७३, ६२६. सादिसन्त पुच्छ भन्ज हन्सादीहि A 
573, 626. Sa'di sa? nta,puccha,bhanja,hansa' dthi 
ttho. 
[Sa-adit+sa-anta, puccha, bhanja, hansa-adthi+ttho. 3 words] 
[V] Sakaranta,puccha,bhanja,hansa-icce'va' madihi dhatuhi 
tapaccayassa saha’ dibyafijanena ttha’deso hoti thane. 


The affix “ta” applied after the roots puccha, bhanja, han- 
sa and the roots ending in “s” etc, together with the last 
component consonant of the root, changes into “ttha” in 
some instances. [See the function shown in bold] 


(1) * tuttho-pleased. [wa] tusa+ta 
(2) ahina-by the snake. * dattho-(had) bitten. naro-the man, i.e. the 
man is bitten by snake. [wa] darnsa+ta 
(3) maya-by me. * puttho-(have) asked. [wa] puccha+ta 
(4) * bhattho. [wa] bhanja+ta 
(5) * pabhattho-(have) thrashed or slipped down. 
[wa] pavbhanj atta 
Note: 4 and 5 have the same root and meaning except the prefix. 
(6) * hattho. [wa] harhsa+ta 
(7) ° pahattho-(have) delighted, laughed. [wa] pa-Nharnsa--ta 
Note: 6 and 7 have the same root and meaning except the prefix. 
(8) * yittho-(have) sacrificed. [wa] yajatta 


Eva'mafifie'pi dhatavo sabbattha yojetabba. 
Thus, similar examples of other roots should be applied. 


५७४, ६१३. वसतो BE 

574, 613. Vasato uttha. [Vasato+uttha. 2 words] 

[V] Vasa-icce’tamha dhatumha takarapaccayassa 
saha’dibyarijanena uttha’deso hoti thane. 
The affix “ta” applied after the root “vasa”, together with 
the last consonant “s” of the root, changes into *uttha" 
where applicable. 


727] 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


vassam-for three month of rains retreat (vassa). * vuttho-(have) 
lived, i.e. (a monk who have) lived three month's rains retreat. 
[wa] vasatta 
Note: Both “uttha (उह)? and “uttha (s«r)" are acceptable texts. 
See Sutta no. 613, Rüpasiddhi Pali grammar text. 


५७५, ६१४. वस्स वा वु 

575, 614. Vassa và vu. [Vassat+va+u. 3 words] 

[V] Vasa-sse'va dhatussa tapaccaye pare vakarassa ukara'deso 
hoti và. 


66,99 


The component consonant of the root “vasa”, some- 


times changes into “u” when a “ta” affix is applied. [This 
Sutta changes “v” of “vasa-to stay” into “u”. Function shown in bold. 
underlined] 


(1) * vusitam-(have) lived. i.e. completed. brahmacariyarh-the 
noble practice. [Here, “v” of *vasa-to stay" becomes “u” and “v” is 
inserted before it by Sutta 404] [wa] vasa--ta 

(2) ° uttho [Here, “v” of *vasa-to stay" becomes “u” and affix “ta” 
along with the root-end consonant “s” changes into “ttha” by 573]. 
[wa] vasatta 

(3) * vuttho-(have) lived. và-also, as another possible example found 
in texts. [wa] vasa--ta 

Note: “va” means another possible example although being inapplica- 

ble by the function of this Sutta, but usually found in the Pali texts. 


५७६, ६०७. धढभहेहि धढा च 
576, 607. Dha,dha,bha,hehi dha,dha ca. 
[Dha, dha, bha, hehit+dha, dha+ca. 3 words] 
[V] Dha,dha,bha,ha-icce’va’mantehi dhatuhi takarapaccayassa 
yathakkamam dha,dha’desa honti. 


The affix “ta” applied after the roots ending in consonants 
“dha, dha, bha, ha" changes into “dha, dha” respectively. 
Note: Affix “ta” after dha, bha-ending roots becomes dha while affix 
“ta” after dha, ha-ending roots becomes dha. 


Yatha? For example, 
728 


Kibbidhana Kappa 


(1) * buddho-enlightened. bhagava-Buddha. [Here, affix “ta” 
changes into *dha"] [wa] budha+ta 

(2) * vuddho-grown-up, old. bhikkhu-monk, i.e. senior monk. 
[Here, affix “ta” becomes “dha”] [wa] vadha+ta 

Note: The morphological procedure of this example is a bit complex. 

(3) * laddharh-obtained. me-by me. patta,civaram-bowl and robe, 
i.e. I have got my bowl and robes. [Here, affix “ta” changes into 
*dha"] [wa] labha+ta 

(4) aggina-by fire. e daddharh-was burnt. vanam-the forest, i.e. the 
forest was burnt by fire. [Here, affix “ta” changes into *dha"] 
[wa] daha+ta 


५७७, ६२८. भन्जतो ग्गो च 
577, 628. Bhanj ato ggo Ca. [Bhanjatotggotca. 3 words] 
[V] Bhanjato dhatumha takarapaccayassa ggo-adeso hoti 
saha’dibyarijanena. 
The affix “ta” applied after the root "bhanja", together 


८८५११ 


with its last component consonant “j” changes into “gga”. 


e bhaggo-(have) broken. [wa] bhanjat+ta 


५७८, ५६०. भुजादीन मन्तो नोद्विच 
578, 560. Bhuja'dina' manto no dvi ca. 
[Bhuja-admarh+anto+no+dvitca. 5 words] 
[V] Bhujaicce’va’madinam dhatünam anto no hoti, 
tapaccayassa ca dvibhavo hoti. 


The last component consonant of the roots *bhuja" etc. is 
elided, while the affix “ta” applied after them is duplicated 


too. [Eliding the root consonant and augmenting the affix “ta”. Two 
functions] 


(1) * bhutto-he had eaten. [wa] bhuja+ta 

(2) ° bhuttavi-he ate. [wa] bhuja+tavi 

(3) * catto-given up, abandoned, sacrificed. [wa] cajat+ta 
(4) * satto-clung to, attached to. [wa] sanja+ta 


729 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


(5) * ratto-attached to (as with desire or lust), enamored of. 
[wa] ranja+ta 
(6) * yutto-tied, engaged, bound. [wa] yujat+ta 
(7) * vivitto-retired by being secluded. [wa] vi-Nvica-ta 
Note: All examples shown here have the roots ending in consonants “j” 
and “c”. 


५७९, ६२९. वच वा वु 
579, 629. Vaca va’vu. 


[1.Vacat+vatu. 3 words or 2. Vacat+va+vatu. 4 words.] 
(This Sutta is structurally somewhat similar to 575) 


[V] Vaca-icce'tassa dhatussa vakarassa ukara’deso 1011. 
Anto cakaro no hoti. Ta-paccayassa ca dvebhavo hoti va. 


The entire component letters “va” of the root “vaca”, some- 
times changes into “u” while component consonant “ec” of 
the root is elided. Besides, the applied affix “ta” is also re- 
duplicated. [Three functions] 


(1) * vuttam-(is) said. bhagavata-by Buddha. [Here, “va” becomes 
“u” and a “v” is inserted] [wa] vacatta 

(2) ° uttam-(is) said. và. [Here, “v” is not inserted leaving “u” as it 
is] [wa] vaca+ta 


Note: Compare the function of Sutta numbers 487, 575, 579, as they 
are somewhat similar to each other. 


५८०, ६३०. गुपादीनञ्च 

580, 630 Gupa’dinan’ca. [Gupa-adinarh+ca. 2 words] 

[V] Gupa-icceva’madinarh dhatünam anto ca byafijano no hoti, 
ta-paccayassa ca dvebhavo hoti. 
The last component consonant of the roots “gupa” etc. is 
elided while the affix “ta” applied after them is also redu- 
plicated. [Two functions] 
(1) * sugutto-well-protected, well-kept. [wa] su-Vgupa+ta 
(2) * catto (Re: 578). 
(3) * litto-anointed. [wa] lipatta 


730 


Kibbidhana Kappa 


(4) * santatto-well-heated. [wa] sarn-Vtapa+ta 
(5) * utto (Re: 579). 

(6) * vivitto (Re: 578). 

(7) * sitto-poured (as with liquid). [wa] sicat+ta 


I 9 


Eva'maífie'pi yojetabba. 


५८१, ६१६. तरादीहि इण्णो 

581, 616. Tara'dihi inno. [Tara-adihi+inno.2 words] 

[V] Tara-icce’vamadthi dhatühi ta-paccayassa inna’deso hoti, 
anto ca byafijano no hoti. 


The affix “ta” applied after the roots “tara” etc changes 
into “inna” and the last component consonant of the root is 
also elided. [Two functions] 


(1) tarati’ ti [tarati+iti] tarati-crosses over. iti ® tinno-(had) 
crossed, overcome (such as river, obstacles etc,). [wa] tarat+ta 

(2) uttarati’ti [uttarati+iti] uttarati-moves beyond. iti ® uttinno- 
moved beyond. [wa] u-Atara-ta 

(3) sampürati'ti [sarhpirati+iti] sampürati-is well-filled. iti 
° sampunno-well filled, full. [wa] sarn-Vpiira+ta 

(4) turatT [turati+it] turati-dashes off. iti ® tunno-hurried. 
[wa] turat+ta 

Note: It is also found tudatr'ti tunno. In this case, the root is tuda-to 
poke, to pierce. 

(5) parijiratr ti [parijirati+iti] parijirati-degenerates. iti. 
e parijinno-degenerated, old. [wa] pari-Vjara+ta 

(6) akiratr'ti [akirati+iti] akirati-mingles. iti ® akinno-mingled, 
mixed. [All Kattu-sadhana EDs] [wa] a-Vkiratta 


५८२, ६३१. भिदादितो इन्नअन्नईणा वा 
582, 631. Bhida’dito inna,anna,ma va. 
[Bhida-aditot+inna, anna, Ina+va. 3 words] 
[V] Bhidi-icce’va’madthi dhatühi ta-paccayassa 
inna,anna,ina’desa honti và, anto ca byafijano no hoti. 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


The affix “ta” applied after the roots “bhida” etc. some- 
times changes into “inna, anna, Ina” and the last compo- 
nent consonant of the root is also elided. [Two functions] 


inna-function examples: 

(1) bhinditabbo’ ti [Bhinditabbo+iti] Bhinditabbo-should break 
apart. iti * bhinno-split, broken. [Kamma-sadhana] 
[wa] bhida+ta 

(2) chindiyatr'ti [chindiyati-iti] chindiyati-(is) cut. iti ® chinno- 
cut. [wa] chidi+ta 

(3) ucchindtyittha’ ti [ucchindiyittha+iti] ucchindiyittha-(was) to- 
tally cut. iti e ucchinno-cut. [wa] u-Vchidi+ta 

(4) diyati’ ti [diyati+iti] diyati-(is) given. iti * dinno-given. 
[All Kamma-sadhana EDs] [wa] da+ta 

(5) nisidatr ti [nisidati+iti] nisidati-sits. iti ® nisinno-sat. [Kattu- 
sadhana] [wa] ni-Vsadatta 


anna-function examples: 

(1) sutthu-well. chadiyatt’ ti [chadiyati+iti] chadiyati-(is) covered. 
iti * suchanno-well-covered. [Kamma-sadhana] 
[wa] su-Nchada+ta 

(2) khidat?’ ti [khidati+iti] khidati-exhausts, wears out. iti 
* khinno-exhausted, fatigued, feared. [wa] khida+ta 

Note: There is another possible root as “khita-to fear” 

(3) rodati’ti [rodati+iti] rodati-weeps. iti * runno-wept. [Both Kat- 
tu-sadhana] [wa] ruda--ta 


Ina-function example: 
(1) ° khina-(is) finished up, nothing left. jati-rebirth. [wa] khi+ta 


Va'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “va” for? 

To show that the examples below are inapplicable for func- 
tion of this Sutta as restricted by the word “vā”. 

bhijjatr ti [Bhijjati+iti] bhijjati-(it) breaks. iti * bhitti-wall (made 
of breakable materials). [Kattu-sadhana] [wa] bhida+ti 


732 


Kibbidhana Kappa 


५८३, ६१७. सुसपचसकतो क्खक्का च 
583, 617. Susa,paca,sakato kkha,kka ca. 
[Susa, paca, sakato+kkha, kkat+ca. 3 words] 
[V] Susa,paca,saka-icce'va'madihi dhatühi ta-paccayassa 
kkha,kka'desa honti, anto ca byafijano no hoti. 


The affix “ta” applied after the roots “susa, paca, saka" 
etc. changes into “kkha, kka" and the last component con- 
sonant of the root is also elided. [Two functions] 


kkha-function example: 
(1) sussati’ti [sussati+iti] sussati-(it) dries. iti ° sukkham-dried. 
kattharh-wood, the dry timber. [Kattu-sadhana] [wa] susa+ta 


kka-function examples: 
(1) paccati’ti [paccatititi] paccati-(is) ripe. iti ० pakkarh-ripened. 
phalarh-fruit, the ripe fruit. [Kamma-sadhana] [wa] pacatta 
(2) [1] sakati samattheti-(is) able. 
[2] püjetr' ti [püjeti*iti] pujeti-honors. iti và ® sakko-an able 
being or an honored being, i.e. the king of heaven. sujampati-the 
husband of a deity named “Suja” is to be regarded as “sakko”. [Kat- 
tu-sadhana] [wa] saka+ta 
Note: There are two EDs for the word Sakko. The first is shown by 
“Sakati samattheti-is able". The second is explained by “pūjeti”. 
These two EDs show two different meanings of the root “saka” in the 
word “Sakko”. 


५८४, ६१८. पक्कमादीहि न्तो च 
584, 618. Pa’kkama’dihi nto ca. 
[Pa-kamu-adthitnto+ca. 3 words] 
[V] Pa?'kkama-icce'va' madihi dhatuhi ta-paccayassa nto-adeso 
hoti, anto ca no hoti. 


The affix “ta” applied after the roots “kamu prefixed with 
pa" etc. changes into “nta” and the last component conso- 
nant of the root is also elided. [Two functions] 


733 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


(1) pakkamatr'ti [Pakkamati+iti] Pakkamati-goes away. iti 
e pakkanto-gone away. [pa-away+kanta-gone. ] 
[wa] pa-Nkamu-ta 
(2) vibbhamatr'ti [Vibbhamati+iti] Vibbhamati-totters. iti 
* vibbhanto-tottered, disrobed (as a wavering monk being no 
longer able to maintain pious life). [Both Kattu-sadhana] 
[wa] vi-Vbhamu-+ta 
(3) * sankanto-moved (to somewhere else). [wa] sarh-Vkamu+ta 
(4) * khanto-endured with patience, being patient or dug up. 
[wa] khamu-ta, 
Note: In the second meaning, the root 15 khanu-to dig. 
(5) * santo-calmed, calm. [wa] samu+ta 
(6) * danto-trained, tame. [wa] damu+ta 
(7) ° vanto-vomitted. [wa] vamu+ta 


Caggahanam kimattham"? 

Tehe'va dhatühi ti-paccayassa nti hoti. Anto ca no hoti. 
What does the extra word “ca” in Sutta meant for? 

By means of the word “ca” in Sutta, the affix “ti (Re: Sutta 
553)” applied after those roots changes into “nti” while the 
last consonant of the root is also elided. 


(1) ° kanti-act of liking, joy. [wa] kamu-+ti 
(2) ° khanti-act of endurance, patience. [Wa] khamu-ti 
Evam sabbattha. 


५८५, ६१९. जनादीन मा तिम्हि च 
585, 619. Jana'dr'na' má timhi ca. 
[Jana-adinam+a+timhit+ca. 4 words] 

[V] Jana-icce’va’madinarh dhatünam antassa byafijanassa 
attam hoti ta-paccaye pare, timhi ca. 
The vowel of the initial consonant of the root “jana” 
changes into “a” when the affix “ta” or “ti” is applied after 
it. [“a” of “ja” changes into “व्र”. See it shown in bold] 


(1) ajant'ti [ajani-iti] ajani-(was) born, arisen. iti ® Jato-born, 


734 


Kibbidhana Kappa 


arisen. [Kattu-sadhana] [wa] jana-ta 

(2) jananarh-act of arising or being born. ® jAti-arising, the birth. 
[Bhava-sadhana ED] [wa] jana+ti 

Timhr' ti kimattham? 

Afiflasmim’pi paccaye pare akara-nivattanattharh. 

What is the word “timhi” in Sutta for? 

This function of changing into “a” is debarred in words 

where other affixes are applied. [See examples] 


(1) janitva-having arisen. [wa] jana+tva 

(2) janita-that which arises. [wa] jana+ta 

(3) janiturh-to arise, for arising. [wa] jana+turh 
(4) janitabbam-should arise. [wa] janat+tabba 
icce'va'madi. 


५८६, ६००. गमखनहनरमादीन मन्तो 
586, 600. Gama,khana,hana,rama'dina' manto. 
[Gama, khana, hana, ramu-adinam-anto. 2 words] 
[V] Gama,khana,hana,ramu-icce'va' madinam dhatünam anto 
byafijano no hoti và ta-paccaye pare, timhi ca. 


The last consonants of the roots “gamu, khana, hana, 
ramu” etc, is sometimes elided when affixes “ta” or “ti” 


follow. [This Sutta elides the last consonants “m, n" of the roots 
“gamu, khana, etc” when affixed with either “ta” or “ti” affix after 
them. ] 


(1) sundararh-to the good. nibbanam-Nibbana. gacchatr'ti 
[gacchati+iti] gacchati-goes. iti ® sugato-Lord Buddha who goes 
to good destiny of Nibbana. [wa] suVgamutta 

(2) sundaram nibbanam gacchatt’ti ® sugati [Meaning the same, 
except different affix *ti"]. [Kattu-sadhana] [wa] suVgamutti 

(3) ° khatam-dug. [wa] khanu+ta 

(4) ° khati-digging. [wa] khanu--ti 

(5) ° upahatari-killed, hurt. [wa] upaVhana+ta 

(6) ° upahati-killing, hurting. [wa] upaVhana+ti 


735 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


(7) * rato-rejoiced. [wa] ramu+ta 
(8) * rati-rejoicing. [wa] ramu+ti 
(9) ° mato-knew, known. [wa] mana+ta 

(10) ° mati-knowing, knowledge, view, idea. [wa] mana+ti 


Va'ti kimattharn? What is the word “va” for? 

To show that examples below are inapplicable for function 

of this Sutta as restricted by the word “vā”. 

(1) * ramato-of the one who rejoices. [wa] ramu+antat+sa (Noun 
in genitive case, not a verb) 

(2) * ramati-(He) rejoices. [wa] ramuta+ti (an Akhyata verb) 





५८७, ६३२. रकारो च 

587, 632. Rakaro ca. [Rakaro+ca. 2 words] 

[V] Rakaro ca dhatüna'mantabhüto no hoti tapaccaye pare 
timhi ca. 


The last component consonant “r” of roots “kara, sara” 
etc. is elided when a “ta” or “ti” affix is applied after them. 


(1) pakarena-by various manner. kariyatt’ti [kariyati+iti] karryati- 
(is) done. iti ® pakato-done variously. [wa] paVkara+ta 

(2) pathamarh-initially. kartyatr'ti  pakati-act of initial state, 
the natural. [wa] paVkara+ti 

(3) visarīyatT ti [visariyatititi] visartyati-moves disorderly. iti 
° visato-moving disorderly, being spread. [wa] viVsaratta 

(4) * visati-disorderly move or being spread as poison or water or ef- 
fect of medicine etc. [All Kamma-sadhana EDs] 
[wa] viNsaradti 


736 


Kibbidhana Kappa 


५८८,६२० ठापान मिई च 

588, 620.Tha,pa,na’mi,i ca. [Tha, pa, nami, i*ca. 3 words] 

[V] Tha,pa-icce tesarh dhatünam antassa akarassa i-kara,1- 
kara' desa honti yathasankhyam tapaccaye pare, timhi ca. 


The component vowel “a” of the roots “tha, pa” etc. 
changes into “i, T’ respectively when “ta” or “ti” affixes are 
applied after them. [a of tha>i, pa>1.] 


(1) yatra-where. * thito-stood. [wa] tha+ta 

(2) * thiti-act of standing. [wa] tha+ti 

(3) * pito-(he was) drunk, being drunk. [wa] pa+ta 

(4) * piti-act of drinking. [wa] patti 

Note: When the root is different as “pr”, the word "piti" has a different 
meaning as “joy”. It is also inapplicable by the function of this Sutta. 
Just apply the affix “ti” after the root. No other procedure is required in 
such case of a word in this root. 


५८९, ६२१. हन्तेहि हो हस्स ळो वा अदहनहानं 
589, 621. Ha’ntehi ho hassa lo và a-daha, nahanam. 
[Ha-antehi+ho+hassat+lo+va+a-daha, nahanam. 6 words] 
[V] Hakara'ntehi dhàtühi ta-paccayassa hakara'deso hoti, 
hakarassa dhatva’ntassa lo hoti và adaha, nahanarh. 





The affix “ta” applied after “ha-ending roots", (except 
“daha” and *naha"), changes into “ha”. In addition, the 
component consonant “h” of the root changes into T" in 
some words. [two functions, the affix “ta” changes into “h” 
and the last consonant “h” of the root becomes “T’>Th] 


(1) aruhittha’ti [aruhittha+iti] aruhittha-climbed up, rode. iti 
० arulho-climbed, rode. [Kamma-sadhana ED] [wa] aVruha+ta 
(2) * galho-plunged, entered deeply into, unfathomable (This is figura- 
tive meaning). [wa] gaha+ta 
(3) * balho-grown, increased, intense (adj). [wa] baha+ta 
Note: This word is mainly used as an adjective meaning "severe and in- 
tense”. 


(4) ° mülho-confused, being ignorant (adj). [wa] muha+ta 


737 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


Adaha,nahana’miti kimattham? 

What is the word “adaha, nahanam" for? 

To show that the examples below are inapplicable as they 

have the roots “daha” & “naha” in them. (This word “adaha, 

nahanarh” means “except the roots daha & naha"). 

(1) dayhat?’ ti [Dayhati+iti] dayhati-(is) burnt. iti * daddho-burnt. 
[wa] daha+ta 

(2) sar sutthu-well. nayhati'ti [nayhati+iti] nayhati-(is) tied, 
bound. iti. * sannaddho-well-tied, entangled. [Both Kamma- 
sadhana EDs] [wa] sam Vnaha--ta 

Note: Sutthu is a synonym of the nipata word “sam”. In the EDs, it is 

natural to give explanation of the less-understandable word by using 

more understandable word of similar meaning. 


Iti kibbidhanakappe tatiyo kando. 
The Third Section of Kita ends. 


738 


Kibbidhana Kappa 


Catuttha Kanda 
The Fourth Section 


५९०, ५७९. णम्हि रन्जस्स जो भावकरणेसु 
590, 579. Namhi ranjassa jo bhava,karanesu. 
[Namhitranjassa+jo+bhava,karanesu. 4 words] 
[V] Namhi paccaye pare ranja-icce'tassa dhatussa antabhütassa 
nja-karassa jo-adeso hoti bhava,karanesu. 


८८५११ 


The “nja” of the root “ranja” changes into “j” when an af- 
fix “n” of bhava and karana senses is applied after the root. 


(1) rafijanam-act of coloring, also act of craving, * rago-dyeing 
(Literal meaning, said of clothes or linen), craving or lust (figura- 
tive meaning, said of the mind). [Bhava-sadhana] 

(2) ranjanti-dye. etena'ti [etenatiti] etena-by that dye. iti ® rago- 
that by which things get dyed, dye, any coloring agent, lust. 
[Karana-sadhana ED] [wa] ranjatna 


Bhàva,karanesü'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “bhavakaranesu” for? 

To show that the example below is inapplicable as the 
“na-affix” of the word has only a sense of kattu in it, not 


bhava or karana senses. [Kattu sense of affix shown by its 
ED] 


ranjati’ ti [Ranjati+iti] ranjati-(it) dyes, iti * rango-dye, color- 
ing agent. [Kattu-sadhana] [wa] ranja+na 


५९१, ५४४. हनस्स घातो 
591, 544. Hanassa ghato. [Hanassa+ghato. 2 words] 


[V] Hana-icce’tassa dhatussa sabbassa ghata'deso hoti namhi 
paccaye pare. 


The root “hana” changes into “ghata” when a “na” affix is 
applied after the root. 


(1) upahanatr'ti [upahanati+iti] upahanati-(It) hurts closely. iti 
* upaghato-hurting closely. [wa] upaVhana+na 


739 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


(1) gavo-the cows. hanati'ti [hanati+iti] hanati-(he) kills. iti 
* goghatako-the one who kills cows, i.e. butcher. 
[Both Kattu-sadhana] [wa] Go-saddipapada-hanat+nvu 


५९२, ५०३. वधो वा सब्बत्थ 
592, 503. Vadho và sabbattha. 
[Vadho-va-sabbattha. 3 words] 
[V] Hana-icce'tassa dhatussa vadha’deso hoti và sabbattha 
thanesu. 


The root “hana” sometimes changes into “vadha” when a 
“na” affix is applied at all instances. 


(1) hanatt’ ti. hanati-(One) kills or hurts. iti ® vadho-the one who 
hurts or kills. [wa] hanat+na 

(2) * vadhako-the one who hurts or kills, killer. [ED for both are the 
same Kattu-sadhana] [wa] hana*nvu 

(3) * avadhi-(he) killed. * ahani-(He) killed. va. [wa] hanat+1 
(Akhyata verb, these two examples show that the function is appli- 


cable not only in Kita-affixed words, but also in a wide range of 
words including such Akhyata verbs shown here.) 


५९३, ५६४. आकारन्तान मायो 

593, 564 Akara’ntana’mayo. [Akara-antanarh+ayo. 2 words] 

[V] Akara'ntànam dhatiinarh antassa akarassa aya’deso hoti 
namhi paccaye pare. 


The component vowel “a” of a-ending roots changes into an 
"aya" when a “na-containing” affix is applied after the 
roots. [The 4-ending roots are such as da-to give, va-to move, etc.] 


(1) dadatr'ti [Dadati+iti] dadati-(one) gives. iti * dayako-the one 
who gives, a donor. [wa] da+nvu 

(2) danam-alms. datum-to give. silam-(is) the habit. yassa’ti [yas- 
satiti] yassa-of whatever person. iti ° danadayi-the one whose 
habit is to give alms, a generous habitual alms-donor. 
[wa] dana-saddüpapada-da-*ni 


740 


Kibbidhana Kappa 


(3) majjam-intoxicants. datum silam yassa’ti ° majjadayi-the 
one whose habit is to give intoxicants, an intoxicant-sponsor. 
[wa] majja-saddüpapada-da--ni 
(4) nagararh-to the city. yaturh-to go. silarh yassa’ti 
e nagarayayl-the one whose habit is to go to city, a habitual 
city-goer. [Kattu-sadhana EDs] [wa] nagara-saddüpapada-yà--ni 
Note: Even though it is said "namhi paccaye pare" in vutti of Sutta, the 
function is not limited to only na-affixed words. It is also applicable for 


any word applied with n-containing affix. Please refer to Sutta 532 for 
similar examples expressive of the habitual nature. 


५९४, ५८२. पुरसमुपपरीहि करोतिस्स खखरा वा तपच्चयेसु च 
594, 582. Pura,sa’mupa,parthi karotissa kha,khara 
va ta-paccayesu ca. 
[Pura, sam, upa, parthit+karotissat+kha, khara+va-+ta- 
paccayesutca. 6 words] 
[V] Pura,sam,upa,pari-icce’tehi karotissa dhatussa 
kha,khara’desa honti và ta-paccaye pare, namhi ca. 


The root “kara” prefixed with “pura (front), sar (well), upa 
(near), pari (around)” sometimes changes into “kha” or 
“khara” when either “ta” or “na” affixes etc are applied 
after it. 


(1) pure-at the front. kartyati’ti [karryati+iti] karryati-(is) done or 
kept. iti * purakkhato-done or kept at the front, i.e. preferred, 
honored. [wa] pura-saddüpapada-kara--ta 

(2) samma-well. kartyati'ti ® sankhato-well-done, i.e. all condi- 
tioned things. [wa] sarn-Vkaratta 

(3) upagantva-having approached. kariyati’ti e upakkhato-done 
in proximity. [1,2,3 are Kamma-sadhana EDs] 

[wa] upa-Vkara+ta 

(4) parisamantato-from all around. karotr'ti [karotititi] karoti-(it) 
does, i.e. keeps. iti * parikkharo-things kept around oneself, i.e. 
accessories of daily need, personal effects. [Kattu-sadhana ED] 
[wa] pari-Vkara+na 


741 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


Note: In the word “parisamantato”, samantato is a synonymous ex- 
planation for “pari” as Upasagga word “pari” alone is not enough to 
convey the meaning. 
(5) sarhkartyat? ti [sarhkariyati+iti] sarhkartyati-(is) well-done. iti 
* sankharo-well-done, i.e. conditioned things. 
[Kamma-sadhana ED] [wa] sarh-Vkaratna 


Va'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “va” for? 

To show that the example is inapplicable as restricted by 
the word “vā”. (There is *n" affix in it. The root is also “kara”, 
but no function of the Sutta. What does it all mean? It means that in 
Buddhist scriptures, you will find words with “kha or khara” mor- 
phemes while you will also find words without it. So, don't be con- 
fused whenever you come across such a wide diversity of words for 
the same root word * kara") 

Upagantva karotr'ti * upakaro-an act done nearby, i.e. help or 
any act of good-will done by parents, teachers, best friends or good- 
willed strangers etc. [Kattu-sadhana] [wa] upa-Nkaradna 


५९५, ६३७. तवेतुनादीसु का 

595, 637. Tave,tuna’disu ka. [Tave, tuna disu-kà. 2 words] 

[V] Tave,tuna-icce'va' madisu paccayesu karotissa dhatussa 
ka-adeso hoti va. 


a? 


The root “kara” sometimes changes into “ka” when “tave, 
tuna" affixes are applied after it. 


(1) ° katave-to do. [wa] kara-tave 
(2) ° katurh-to do. [wa] kara+turh 

* katturh-to do. và [Inapplicable example] [wa] kara-*-tum 
(3) ° katuna-having done. [wa] kara--tuna 

* kattuna-having done. va. [Inapplicable example] 

[wa] kara--tuna (Both are the same) 


५९६, ५५१. गमखनहनादीनं तुंतब्बादीसु न 
596, 551. Gama,khana,hana’dinam 


742 


Kibbidhana Kappa 


tum,tabba'disu na. 
[Gama, khana, hana-adinarh+tum, tabba-adisutna. 3 words] 
[V] Gama,khana,hana-icce'va'madinam dhatiinarh antassa 
nakaro hoti va tum,tabba'disu paccayesu. 


The last component consonants “m, n" of roots “gamu, 
khanu, hana” etc sometimes changes into an “n” when 
“tum, tabba" affixes are applied after them. 

Note: In each pair of examples, the “n” is shown in bold underlined, 
and clearly visible in the first example. The second is inapplicable ex- 


eee? 


ample where an “i” is inserted. 


(1) * gantum, * gamitum-to go. [wa] gamu-tum 
(2) * gantabbarh,* gamitabbarh-should go. [wa] gamu+tabba 
(3) ° khantum. * khaniturh-to dig. [wa] khanu-tum 
(4) ° khantabbarh * khanitabbam-should dig. 

[wa] khanu+tabba 
(5) ° hantur, * haniturh-to kill, to hurt. [wa] hanat+turh 
(6) * hantabbam. * hanitabbam-should kill or hurt. 

[wa] hana+tabba 
(7) * mantum, * manitum-to know. [wa] mana+turh 
(8) ° mantabbam, * manitabbam-should know. 

[wa] mana+tabba 


Adiggahanarh kimattham? Tunaggahanattharn. 

What is the word "adi" for? 

For the purpose of including the affix “tuna” (for application 
of the function of this Sutta in tuna-affixed verbs too). 

e gantuna-having gone. [wa] gamuttuna 

e khantuna-having dug. [wa] khanu+tuna 

* hantuna-having hurt. [wa] hana+tuna 

e mantuna-having known. [wa] mana+tuna 

Note: Many verbs with other affixes are also found to be 
applicable as per the rule of this Sutta in the canonical texts. 


743 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


५९७, ६४१. सब्बेहि तुनादीनं यो 
597, 641. Sabbehi tuna’dinam yo. 
[Sabbehi+tuna-adinarh+yo. 3 words] 
[V] Sabbehi dhatühi tuna’ dinarh paccayanam yakara’deso hoti 
va. 
The affixes “tuna, tvana, tva" etc, applied after all roots 


sometimes changes into “ya”. [See “ya” shown in bold. In each 
set of examples, the second one is inapplicable] 


(1) * abhivandiya * abhivanditva-having bowed. 
[wa] abhiVvandattva 
(2) ° ohaya, * ohitva-having abandoned. [wa] ava-Vha+tva 
(3) * upaniya, * upanetva-having carried along. 
[wa] upaVni+tva 
(4) * passiya, * passitva-having seen. [wa] disa-tva 
(5) ° uddissa, ["tva" changes into "ya" by this Sutta>uNdis+ya. 
(assume that the root-ending vowel “a” of disa had been elided) 
“ya” morphs into “sa” by assimilation procedure of 443 in this ex- 
ample >utdissa. The consonant “d” of the root is augmented >ud- 
dissa] 
* uddisitva-having directed. [wa] uVdisa+tva 
(6) * Adaya, * adiyitva-having taken. [wa] avda+tva 


५९८, ६४३. चनन्तेहि vod 
598, 643. Ca,na’ntehi raccam. 
[Ca, na-antehi+raccarh. 2 words] 
[V] Cakara,nakara’ntehi dhatühi tuna'dinam paccayanam 
racca'deso hoti và. 


All the affixes “tuna, tvana, tva" etc applied after all “ca, 
na-ending roots" sometimes changes into *racca". 


[“ is to be elided as per Sutta 539 thus leaving only “acca” shown un- 
derlined] 


(1) * vivicca-having renounced, being away from. 
[wa] viVvica+tva 
(2) * ahacca-having hurt or having touched. [wa] aVhanattva 


744 


Kibbidhana Kappa 


(3) * upahacca-having hurt or having touched closely. 
[wa] upaVhana+tva 


Va'ti kimattham? What is the word “va” for? 

To show the example below is inapplicable as restricted by 
the word “va”. 

* hantva-having killed. [wa] hanat+tva 


५९९, ६४४. दिसा स्वानस्वान्तलोपो च 
599, 644. Disa svana,sva’ntalopo ca. 
[Disa+svana, svat+antalopo+ca. 4 words] 
[V] Disa-icce'taya dhatuya tuna’ dinarh paccayanam 
svana,sva’desa honti, antalopo ca. 


The affixes “tuna” etc applied after the root word “disa” 
changes into “svana, sva" and the last consonant "s" of the 
root is also elided. [See the applied function shown underlined] 


(1) ° disvana-having seen. [wa] disa+tuna or tvana [one of these 
affixes are applicable] 
(2) ° disva-having seen, after seeing. [wa] disat+tva 


६००, ६४५. महदभेहि म्मय्हज्जब्भद्धा च 
600, 645. Ma,ha,da,bhehi mma,yha,jja,bbha,ddha 
yna,jJ 
ca. 
[Ma, ha, da, bhehi--mma, yha, jja, bbha, ddhat+ca. 3 words] 
[V] Ma,ha,da,bha-icce’va’mantehi dhatühi tuna'dinam 
paccayanam mma,yha,jja,bbha,ddha-adesà honti va. 
antalopo ca. 


All the affixes “tuna, tvana, tva" etc applied after all “ma, 
ha, da, bha-ending roots”, sometimes changes into “mma, 
yha, jja, bbha, ddha” respectively. In addition, the last 
component consonants of the root are also elided. [See the ap- 
plied functions shown underlined. The second is inapplicable example.] 
(1) [mma-function]  agamma, * 4gamitva-having come. 

[wa] aVgamuttva 


745 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


(2) ° okkamma. * okkamitva-having gone downward, or plunging 
into (as into a pond or a problem). [wa] avaVkamuttva 

(3) [yha-function] * paggayha, * pagganhitva-having lifted up (by 
act or words of encouragement or courtesy when someone did well). 
[wa] paVgaha+tva (First example WA) 
[wa] * paNgaha-nhà--tvà (Second example, dual affixes) 

(4) [jja-function] * uppajja, * uppajjitva-having arisen. 
[wa] uVpadattva 

(5) [bbha-function] * arabbha, * arabhitva-having exerted, after 
having made effort. [wa] āvrabha+tvā 

(6) [ddha-function] * araddha, * arabhitva-having exerted. 
[wa] aVrabha+tva 





६०१, ३३४. तद्धितसमासकितका नामं वा तवेतुनादीसु च 
601, 334. Taddhita,samasa,kitaka namam' va" tave, 
tuna'disu ca. 
[Taddhita, samasa, kitaka+namam-+tivata-tave, tuna’disutca. 
5 words] 
[V] Taddhita,samasa,kitaka-icce' va'manta sadda namam’va 
datthabba tave,tuna,tvana,tvadipaccaya’nte vajjetva. 


All the words processed by due morphological procedures 
as prescribed in relevant Suttas and explained in the sec- 
tions of Taddhita, Samasa and Kitaka, except those words 
ending in affixes tave, tuna, tvana and tvà etc., are to be 
recognized as nouns. 

Summary: This Sutta enjoins to formally recognize all 
Samasa words, Taddhita-affixed words, Kita-affixed words 
as nouns except those Kita-words suffixed with tave, tuna, 
tvana and tva affixes. 





The Benefit of Recognition 
After this formal recognition as nouns, the noun-vibhatti 
(case-terminations) can be applied after them. Then, all the 
necessary steps of morphological procedures are carried out 


746 


Kibbidhana Kappa 


and thus these formally recognized nouns become complete 


words to convey the relevant meanings in a sentence. 

Note: All other indeclinable affixes such as tum, khatturh, tham, dha, 
to, da, dani and so on are to be excluded. This exclusion means that 
words affixed with such indeclinable affixes are neither required to 
formalize as nouns nor any specific morphological procedure be per- 
formed on them. As a result, such words with indeclinable affixes will 
remain unchanged without any specific declension contingent on case- 
ending of nouns. 


* vasittho (Re Sutta 344). 

* pattadhammo-the one who have attained Dhamma. [Tatiya Ba- 
hubbhihi compound] * kumbhakaro. (Re Sutta 524) 
icce'va'madi. 

Note: Those ending in affixes “tave”, “tuna”, “tvana” and "tva" are 
indeclinable. They do not have any gender and numbers. As such, do 
not require to be recognized as nouns. That is why they are excluded. 


Q: Why compound-nouns, words in Taddhita-affixes and 
Kita-affixes are to be formally recognized as nouns by this 
Sutta? 

A: The purpose is to bring such kind of words to comple- 
tion in the same way as ordinary nouns are completed by 
applying all necessary vibhattis (noun-case endings) and per- 
forming due morphological procedures on them. 


This Sutta is a proof which affirms the fact that all Taddhita, Samasa 
and Kita words too are actually nouns in different forms. 


६०२, ६. gf गरु 
602, 6. Dumhi garu. [Dumhi-*garu. 2 words] 


[V] Dumhi akkhare yo pubbo akkharo, so garuko'va 
datthabbo. 


When two syllables (1.e. conjunct-consonants) follow, the 


front word in a short vowel is to be regarded as “garu”. 
[The preceding short vowel is shown in bold and succeeding conjunct 
consonants are shown underlined. See the examples carefully to clarify] 


(1) * bhitva-having broken. [wa] bhida-tva 


747 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


(2) * chitva-having cut. [wa] chidi+tva 
(3) * datvà-having given. [wa] da-tva 
(4) ° hutva-having been. [wa] hi+tva 


६०३, ७. दीघोच 
603, T. Digho Ca. [Dighotca. 2 words] 
[V] Digho ca saro garuko'va datthabbo. 


Any digha (long) vowel is also to be regarded as “garu”. 
[See digha-long vowels shown underlined below.] 


* aharo-food. [wa] à-NVhara--na (a Kita-affixed noun) 

* nadi-river. * vadhü-daughters-in-law. te-those. 

* dhamma-Dhamma. (These words are nouns in Digha) 

* opanayiko-deserved to understand closely as well as logically. 
[wa] upanayatnika (This word is a Taddhita noun) 


Q: Why it has to be regarded as “garu-heavy syllable" and 
“Jahu-light syllable"? 
A: To make the students understand a very basic matter of 
metrical measurement of the garu and lahu, which has to be 
applied in the art of composing Pali verses. It further pro- 
vides the student with basic knowledge in the study of Pali 
prosody and learning of the necessary stress, rhythm and in- 
tonation so that reciting of Pali proses and texts can be done 
correctly. 
Note: The recitation period of a garu syllable is two morae 
while it is one mora for reciting a lahu syllable. 


६०४, ६८४. अक्खरेहि कार 


604, 684. Akkharehi kara. 
[Akkharehi+kara. 2 words] 
[V] Akkhara’tthehi akkhara’bhidheyyehi karapaccayo hoti 


payoge sati. 


To signify a letter, the suffix “kara” is to be applied after 
that letter denoting and referring to it. 


748 


Kibbidhana Kappa 


a-eva-“a” only. * akaro-the letter “a” [wa] a+kara 
a-eva-“a” only. * akaro-the letter “a” [wa] a kara 
ya-eva-“ya” only. * yakaro-the letter “ya” 


[wa] yat+kara 





६०५, ५४७. यथागम मिकारो 
605, 547. Yathagama’ mikaro. [Yatha-agamarh+ikaro. 2 words] 


[V] Yatha'gamam sabbadhatühi sabbapaccayesu i-kara'gamo 
hoti. 


An “i” has to be added after the roots in all affixes in a way 
that conforms to the scriptural usage of Buddhist texts. 
[See the added “i” in each examples shown in bold] 


e kariyarh-(it) should be done. [wa] kara+nya 

e bhavitabbam-(it) should be. [wa] bhü--tabba 

e janitabbarh-(it) should happen. [wa] jana+tabba 

Note: In major Pali texts, another word form is found as “janitabbarh” 
which means “it should be known. In this case, wa is with dual affixes. 
[wa] fa+“na+tabba” 

e viditabbam-(it) should be known. [wa] vida--tabba 

e karitva-having done. [wa] kara+tva 

e icchitarh-(is) wanted. [wa] isu--ta 


६०६, ६४२. दधन्ततो यो क्वचि 
606, 642. Da,dha’ntato yo kvaci. 
[Da, dha-antatotyotkvaci. 3 words] 
[V] Dakara,dhakara’ntaya dhatuya yathagamam yakara'gamo 
hoti kvaci tuna'disu paccayesu. 


A “ya” is sometimes to be added after “da, dha-ending 
roots" when “tuna, tvana, tva" affixes are applied. 

(*y" should be inserted between the root and affix. Later that “y”, along 
with the last consonant of the root, changes into “j” and is reduplicated. 


See the augmented "jj" in the examples shown in bold.) 


(1) buddho-the Buddha. loke-in the world. * uppajjitva-having 
arisen. [wa] uVpadattva 


749 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


(2) dhammarh-the Dhamma. ® bujjhitva-having known. 
[wa] budha+tva 


Dadha’ntato’ti kimattham? 

What is the word *dadhantato" for? 

To show that the example below is inapplicable as it is the 
root “labha” which ends in a “bha”, not in “da, dha”. 

* labhitva-having obtained. [wa] labhat+tva 


Kvacr'ti kimattham? 
What is the word “kvaci” for? 
To show that the example below is inapplicable as restrict- 
ed by the word *kvaci". 
* uppadetva-having caused to arise, causing it to happen. 

[wa] uVpadatne+tva (Dual affixes, please note this.) 
Note: This gerund verb (also referred to as absolutive) is a special kind 
of gerund called causative gerund verb. As a result of having a causa- 
tive affix, there is a vuddhi vowel “a” in the verb after the last “p” of 


८८, 292 


“upa”. Also see one more “p” is reduplicated. 


Iti kibbidhanakappe catuttho kando. 
The Fourth Section of Kita ends. 


750 


Kibbidhana Kappa 


Paficama Kanda 
The Fifth Section 


६०७, ५७८. निग्गहित संयोगादि नो 
607, 578. Niggahita samyoga’di no. 


[Niggahita*samyoga-adi*no. 3 words] 
[V] Samyoga'dibhüto nakaro niggahita’mapajjate. 


The “n” which used to be the initial syllable of two con- 
junct-consonants of some roots, changes into a “niggahita- 


$325 


m. 

[In the root *Ranja-to dye", “nj” is a conjunct, double consonants 
joined in the root. The “n” is said to be in the initial point. That “n” is to 
be changed into “a niggahita-rh” by this Sutta. That “m” further chang- 
es into “ñ” by Sutta 31. See the examples below to clarify this evolving 
process of word and the related function of Sutta] 


(1) * rango-act of coloring. [wa] ranjatna 
(2) ° bhango-act of breaking, tearing apart. [wa] bhanja+na 
(3) * sango-act of clinging. [wa] sanjatna 





६०८, ६२३. सब्बत्थ गे गी 
608, 623. Sabbattha ge gl. [Sabbattha+ge+gi. 3 words] 
[V] Ge-icce’tassa dhatussa gi-adeso hoti sabbattha thane. 


The root word “ge-to sing" changes into "gr" wherever ap- 
propriate in all instances. 


e gitam-sung, the music. [Wa] ge+ta [This is a Kita Verbal-noun] 


* gayati-(He) sings, i.e. He sings the music. [wa] ge+a+ti 
[This is an Akhyata Verb] 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


६०९, ४८४. सदस्स सीदत्तं 
609, 484. Sadassa sidattam. [Sadassa+sidattarh. 2 words] 
[V] Sada-icce'tassa dhatussa sida'deso hoti sabbattha thane. 


The root “sada” changes into “sida” wherever appropriate 
at all instances. 


° nisinno-sat. [wa] niVsada+ta [This is a Kita Verb] 
° nisidati-(He) sits. [wa] niVsadata+ti [This is an Akhyata Verb] 


६१०, ६२७. यजस्स सरस्ति È 
610, 627. Yajassa sarassi’tthe. 
[Yajassatsarassatittthe. 4 words] 
[V] Yaja-icce'tassa dhatussa sarassa i-kara’deso 1100 tthe pare. 


The component vowel “a” of *ya" in the root *yaja" 
changes into “i” when the “ttha”, a derivative morpheme of 


former affix “ta” is behind it. [For “ttha” function, refer to Sutta 
573] 


० yittho-(is) sacrificed. sl. [wa] yajatta 
e yittha-(are) sacrificed. pl. [wa] yajatta 


tthe'ti kimattham? 

What is the word “tthe” for? 

To show that the example shown below is inapplicable as it 
lacks a ta-morpheme "ttha" in it. 

* yajanam-act of sacrifice. [wa] yajatyu 


६११, ६०८. हचतुत्थान मन्तानं दो धे 

611, 608. Ha-catutthana’mantanam do dhe. 
[Ha-catutthanarh+antanarh+do+dhe. 4 words] 

[V] Ha-catutthanam dhatva’ntanam do-adeso hoti dhe pare. 


The last component consonants “ha, dha, bha" of the roots 
“naha, kudha, yudha, sidha, labha, rabha" etc. change 
into “da” when a morpheme “dha” of former affix “ta” is 
being present behind. [Refer to Sutta 576 for “dha” morpheme] 


752 


Kibbidhana Kappa 


(1) * sannaddho-well-tied. [ha changes into da] 
[wa] sarnVnaha+ta 
(2) ° kuddho-(was) angry. [wa] kudha-ta 
(3) * yuddho-fought. [wa] yudhat+ta 
(4) ° siddho-accomplished. [wa] sidha+ta 
[In example 2, 3, 4, dha changes into da] 
(5) * laddho-obtained. [wa] labha+ta 
(6) [a] ° àáraddho-exerted. [wa] 4Vrabhatta. [In 5,6, bha changes 
into da] 
[b] pleased [wa] aVradha+ta (different root for this meaning). 
Note: Catuttha (fourth) means those which are fourth in the 
vagga group. Especially, dha from ta-group, bha from pa- 
group. They are to be changed into “da” by function of this 
Sutta. 





६१२, ६१५. डो ढकारे 


612, 615. Do dhakare. [Do+dhakare. 2 words] 
[V] Ha-catutthanam dhatva’ntanam do-adeso hoti dhakare 
pare. 


The last component consonants “ha, dha” of the root “da- 
ha, vadha” change into “da” when a morpheme “dha” of 


the former affix “ta” is being present behind. [Refer to Sutta 
576 regarding the function of “dha”’] 


(1) dayhat?’ ti [Dayhati+iti] dayhati-(is) burnt. iti ® daddho-burnt. 
[Kamma-sadhana] [wa] daha+ta 

(2) vaddhatr'ti [Vaddhati+iti] vaddhati-(it) grows. iti ° vuddho- 
grown, increased. [Kattu-sadhana] [wa] vadha--ta 

dhakare'ti kimattharh? 

What is the word “dhakare” for? 

To show that the example below is inapplicable as it does 

not have a morpheme “dha” in it. 

* daho-act of burning, the heat. [wa] dahat+na 


753 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


६१३, ५८३. गहस्स घर णेवा 
613, 583. Gahassa ghara ne va. 
[Gahassa*ghara-ne-va. 4 words] 
[V] Gaha-icce'tassa dhatussa sabbassa ghara’deso hoti va 
na-paccaye pare. 


The entire root “gaha” sometimes changes into “ghara” 
when the affix “na” follows after it. 


e gharam-house. ns. [wa] gahat+natsi 
e gharani also gharani-houses. np. [wa] gahatnat+yo 


Va'ti kimattham? What is the word “va” for? 

To show that the example shown below is inapplicable as 
restricted by the word “va”. 

* gaho-act of grabbing such as one's view, notion etc.[wa] gaha+na 


६१४, ५८१. दहस्स दो ळं 
614, 581. Dahassa do lam. 
[Dahassa+do+larh. 3 words] 
[V] Daha-icce’tassa dhatussa dakaro latta’mapajjate va 
na-paccaye pare. 


The component letters “da” of the root word “daha” some- 
times changes into “la” when affix “na” is applied after it. 
[da=la>laha> after vuddhi procedure of “a”, it becomes? laha-pari 
làha] 

paridahanarh-act of burning. ® parilaho-burning (as with heat, de- 
sire, anger, sorrow etc.). [Bhava-sadhana ED] [wa] pariVdaha+na 


Va’ ti kimattham? 
What is the word “va” for? 
To show that the example shown is inapplicable as restrict- 


ed by the word “va”. 
* paridaho-burning. [wa] pariVdahat+na 


754 


Kibbidhana Kappa 


६१५, ५८६. धात्वन्तस्स लोपो क्विम्हि 

615, 586. Dhatva’ntassa lopo kvimhi. 
[Dhatu-antassa+lopo+kvimhi. 3 words] 

[V] Dhatva'ntassa byafijanassa lopo hoti kvimhi paccaye pare. 


The last component consonant of the root is to be elided 
after the affix “kvi” is applied after the root. 


(1) bhujena gacchatr'ti * bhujago. (Re: Sutta 530) 

(2) urena-by chest, gacchati’ti ® urago-the creature which goes 
crawling by means of chest, a reptile, snake [Both Kattu-sadhana] 
[wa] ura-saddüpapada-gamu-tkvi 

(3) * turago-the creature which goes by means of dashing speed, 

a horse. [wa] tura-saddüpapada-gamu-tkvi 

(4) * sankho. (Re: Sutta 530) 


६१६, ५८७. विदन्ते ऊ 

616, 587. Vida’nte ü. [Vida-ante+i. 2 words] 

[V] Vida-icce'tassa dhatussa ante ükara'gamo hoti kvimhi 
paccaye pare. 


There should come an “ū” after the root word “vida” when 
a “kvi” affix is applied after it. [This affix is later deleted] 
lokam-the world. vidati janati'ti [janati+iti] janati-knows. iti 

* lokavidü-the one who knows the world, i.e. Buddha. 

[Kattu-sadhana ED] [wa] loka-saddüpapada-vida-*kvi 

Note: Both verbs *vidati" and “janati” in ED are synonyms. The first 
verb “vidati” is explained by means of another verb of the same mean- 
ing. The purpose is to affirm the meaning of the root *vida-to know" as 


it has other different meanings such as “to feel, to get". In this instance, 
only this meaning “to know” is applicable. 


755 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


६१७, ६३३. नमकरान मन्तानं नियुत्ततम्हि 
617, 633. Na,ma,ka,rana' ma'ntanam ni’yuttatamhi. 
[Na, ma, ka,ranam-*antanam-na-tiyutta-tamhi. 4 words] 
[V] Nakara,makara,kakara,rakaranam dhatva'ntanam lopo na 
hoti i-karayutte ta-paccaye pare. 


The last component consonants “n, m, k, r” (of the roots 
^hana, gamu, ramu, saka, kara" etc.) are not to be elided 
in “ta-affixed” words when “an inserted i" is already in 
place. [Refer to Sutta 605 for 12] 

Summary: This Sutta enjoins not to elide the last conso- 
nants of the root in the “ta-affixed words" when an insert- 
ed “i” have been already applied in the word. 


What does this injunction mean? 

It means that to form a very simple word-structure and 
word-form of “ta-affixed” verbs and verbal nouns, is only 
to apply the affix “ta” and insert an "i" between the root 
and affix. There is no need either to elide the last conso- 
nant of the root nor to do any other specific morpholog- 
ical change if these two functions have been already ap- 


plied on such words. 

See the examples carefully to clarify this. Throughout Pali texts, such 
words are found aplenty. It is a very simple word-form of ta-affixed 
words. It should be noted that even though it is generally said in Sutta 
as "tamhi-ta-affixed", all ta-containing affixes are also applicable in 
view of a wider usage of such examples found in the Pali texts. 


Q: What kind of ta-containing affixes are applicable then? 
A: They are, tabba, turh, tva, tvana, etc. 

[^tuna, tave, taye, tavantu, tavi and teyya" affixes are inapplicable. 
Please see the morphological structure of each word shown in the first 
square bracket before WA to clarify the rule of this Sutta. 


(1) ° hanitum-to kill. [hana+i+turh] [wa] hana+turh 
(2) ° gamito-gone. [gamu+i+ta] [wa] gamu+ta 

(3) ° ramito-rejoiced. [ramuti+ta] [wa] ramu+ta 

(4) * sakito-honored. [saka+i+ta] [wa] saka+ta 


756 


Kibbidhana Kappa 


(5) * sarito-remembered. [saratit+ta] [wa] sarat+ta 
(6) * karitva-having done. [kara+i+tvā] [wa] karat+tva 


ni' yuttatamhr' ti kimattham? 

What is the word “ni’yuttatamhi” for? 

To show that in the examples shown below, there is no 
in them. So, the last component of the root is elided. 
By word “vā”, it means that restriction placed by this Sutta, 
is not always applied except in some instances of words 
where an “i” is already present with a “ta-affix” applied be- 
hind the root. 

* gato-gone. [wa] gamu+ta * sato-remembered. [wa] saratta 


6८५११ 
1 


६१८, ५७१. न कगत्तं चजा ण्वुम्हि 
618, 571. Na ka,gattam ca,ja nvumhi. 
[Na*ka, gattarir*ca, jà*nvumhi. 4 words] 
[V] Cakara,jakara kakara,gakarattam na’pajjante nvumhi 
paccaye pare. 


The function of changing the last component consonants “९, 
j” of the roots into “ka, ga" is inapplicable when a “pvu” 
affix follows. 

Summary: This Sutta debars the function of Sutta 623 in 
words with a “nvu” affix having already been applied. 
Why? 

Because it is a very consistent pattern of the language for 
any nvu-affixed word to change into an “aka” as per Sutta 
622. There is no other morphological procedure affecting 
on “nvu-affixed words" except the “aka” function and a 
vuddhi process where necessary. 


(1) pacati'ti [pacati+iti] pacati-(One) cooks. iti * pacako-the one 
who cooks, chef. [wa] pacatnvu 

(2) yajati'ti [Yajati+iti] yajati-(One) sacrifices. iti ® yajako-the one 
who performs sacrifices. [All are Kattu-sadhana EDs] 
[wa] yaja*nvu 


757 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


६१९, ५७३. करस्स च dd Tet 
619, 573. Karassa ca tattam tusmim. 
[Karassat+ca+tattarh+tusmith. 4 words] 
[V] Kara-icce'tassa dhatussa antassa rakarassa takarattam hoti 
tu-paccaye pare. 


The component consonant “r” of the root “kara” changes 
into “t” when a "tu" affix is applied after it. 


(1) karotT’ti [karoti+iti] karoti-(One) does. iti ® katta-the one who 
does, doer. ns [wa] kara+tu+si 

(2) karonti’ti [karonti+iti] karonti-(ones) do. iti ® kattaro-those 
who do, doers. np. [Both are Kattu-sadhana] [wa] kara+tut+yo 


६२०, ५४९. तुंतुनतब्बेसु वा 
620, 549. Tum,tuna,tabbesu va. 
[Turh, tuna, tabbesu+va. 2 words] 
[V] Kara-icce’tassa dhatussa antassa rakarassa takarattam hoti 
và turh,tuna,tabba-icce’tesu paccayesu. 


The component consonant “r” of the root “kara” some- 
times changes into “t” when "tum, tuna, tabba" affixes are 


applied. [That “t” shown in bold, is to be added to those affixes. See 
the examples carefully. The second example in each pair is inapplica- 
ble] 


(1) ° kattum, * katum-to do. [wa] kara+tur 

(2) ° kattuna, * katuna-having done. [wa] kara+tuna 

(3) * kattabbam, * katabbam-(It) should be done. 
[wa] kara+tabba 


758 


Kibbidhana Kappa 


६२१, ५५३. कारितं विय णानुबन्धो 

621, 553. Karitam viya na" nubandho. 
[Karitamviyatna-anubandho. 3 words] 

[V] Nakara’nubandho paccayo karitam viya datthabbo va. 


Any “n-conjoined affix” is sometimes to be formally 

named as “karita-affix”. 

Note: “na, nya, nvu, ni, nuka" affixes are called n-conjoined affixes. 

[na-affixed words] 

e daho-burning. [wa] daha+na 

e deho-body. [wa] diha*na 

* vaho-mode of conveyance (such as horses, elephants, mules and 
chariots etc.), vehicle. [wa] vaha+na 

e baho-arm. [wa] bahat+na 

e càgo-charitable giving, sharing. [wa] caja*na 

e varo-turn. [wa] varatņa 

e caro-strolling, ambling. [wa] cara+na 

० parikkharo-accessories. [wa] pariVkaratna 


[nvu-affixed words] 

* dayako-donor. [wa] da+nvu 

e nàyako-leader. [wa] ni*nvu 

* Javako-cutter. [wa] lū+ņvu 

e bhavako-the ariser, the developer. [wa] bhit+nvu 


Note: There is always an “aka” function in every word affixed with 
"nvu" affix in addition to having a vuddhi-vowel. 


[ni-affixed words] 

e kari-the one who used to do. [wa] kara+ni 

e ghati-the one who used to kill. [wa] hanat+nt 
e dayi-the one who used to give. [wa] dani 


Va’ti kimattham? 
What is the word “va” for? 
To show that the example below is an exception to the rule 


as restricted by “va” of this Sutta. It is inapplicable to for- 
mally regard the applied “n” affix in it as a Karita, because 





759 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


there is no need to perform a “vuddhi function" for that 
word. [Please note that the purpose of function of this Sutta is to initi- 
ate a ^vuddhi" procedure necessary for completion of some words] 
* upakkharo-act done in proximity, intimate act, help. 

[wa] upaVkaratna 


६२२, ५७०. अनका युण्वूनं 
622, 570. Ana’ka yu,nvü,nam. 
[Ana, aka+yu, nvü, nam. 2 words] 
[V] Yu,nvu-icce'tesam paccayanam ana,aka-icce’te adesa 
honti. 


The affix “yu” changes into “ana” and the affix “pvu” 
changes into “aka”. [See the functions shown in bold, underlined] 


e nandanam-joy. [wa] nandat+yu 

* karako-doer. [wa] kara*nvu 

Note: This Sutta shows a universal pattern of “yu, nvu-affixed" words 
by stating that yu-affixed words has to end in an “ana” while “nvu- 
affixed" words usually end in an “aka” function. 


६२३, ५५४. कगा चजानं 
623, 554. Ka,gà ca,janam. 
[Ka, ga+ca, janam. 2 words] 
[V] Ca,ja-icce'tesam dhatva'ntanam kakara,gakara' desa honti 
na’nubandhe paccaye pare. 


The last component consonant “९” of the root “paca” etc. 
changes into “k” and also last component consonant “j” of 
6693 


the root “yaja” etc. changes into “g” when an affix “na” is 
applied after the roots. [*c"»*k", “j’>“g”] 


e pako-cooking. [wa] pacatna (Here, “c” changes into “k”) 
* yogo-act of tying up, engaging, effort. 
[wa] yujatna (Here, “j” changes into “g”) 


760 


Kibbidhana Kappa 


Iti kibbidhanakappe paficamo kando. 
The Fifth Section of Kita ends. 


Kitakappo nitthito. 
Kita Chapter ends. 


761 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


762 


Unadi Kappa 


8. Unadi Kappa 
Unadi Chapter 


Chattha Kanda 
The Sixth Section of Kita 


६२४, ५६३. कत्तरि कित्‌ 
624, 563. Kattari kit. [Kattari+kit. 2 words] 
[V] Kattu-icce'tasmim atthe kit-paccaya honti. 


All the “kita” affixes have a sense of Kattu (doer, agent). 


* karu-maker, doer, an artisan such as carpenter etc. [wa] kara+nu 
e karuko-same meaning as the first word. [wa] kara+nuka 
[Refer to Sutta 536 for similar affix] 
e karako-the doer. [wa] kara+nvu 
e pacako-the cook. [wa] paca-*nvu [Refer to Sutta 527] 
e katta-the doer. [wa] kara--tu 
e janita-that which causes something, the cause, the father. 
[wa] jana+tu 
e pacita-the cook. [wa] pacat+tu 
e neta-the carrier. [wa] nī+tu [Refer to Sutta 527 for similar affix] 
Note: WA of most examples are shown before. 


६२५, ६०५. भावकम्मेसु किच्चक्तखत्था 
625, 605. Bhava,kammesu kicca,kta,kha’ttha. 
[Bhava,kammesutkicca, kta, kha-attha. 2 words] 
[V] Bhava,kamma-icce'tesva'tthesu kicca,kta,kha’ttha-icce’te 
paccaya honti. 


All the kicca affixes and kta, kh-conjoined a suffixes have 
senses of bhava and kamma. 


Examples of Kicca affix “tabba” & “antya” 
(1) * upasampadetabbam-should be ordained. 
[wa] upaVsarinVpada+tabba 


763 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


(2) ° upasampadantyam-should ordain. bhavata-by your honora- 
ble, i.e. your honorable should get be ordained (as a novice or as a 
monk) [wa] upaVsarnVpada+aniya 

(3) * sayitabbarh-should sleep. bhavata. i.e. your honorable should 
sleep [wa] si+tabba 

(4) * kattabbam-should do. bhavata. [wa] karat+tabba 

(5) * bhottabbo-should eat. odano-the rice. bhavata, 

[wa] bhuja+tabba 

(6) * asitabbarh-should eat. bhojanam-meal. bhavata. 

[wa] asa+tabba 


Examples of the affix “ta” 
(7) * asitarh-eaten. bhavata. [wa] asa+ta 
(8) ° sayitam-slept. bhavata. [wa] sit+ta 
(9) * pacitam-cooked. bhavata. [wa] pacatta 
(10) * asitam-ate. asanam-food. bhavata. [wa] asa+ta 
(11) * sayitam-slept. sayanam-bed. bhavata. [wa] si+ta 
(12) * pacito-cooked. odano-rice. bhavata. [wa] paca+ta 
Examples of kh-conjoined “a” affix. 
(13) * kificissayo-little sleep, sleeping a little. 
[wa] kifici-saddüpapada-si*a 
(14) * Isassayo (same meaning) [wa] 1sam-saddüpapada-si*a 
(15) * dussayo-bad sleep, sleeping badly. [wa] du-Vsita 
(16) * sussayo-good sleep, sleeping well. bhavata. [wa] su-Vsita 
Note: The affix for examples 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, are shown in Sutta 540. 
The affix for 7-12 are shown in 555, 556, 557. The affix for 13-16, are 


shown in Sutta 560. See the explanation in next Sutta regarding the af- 
fix in the examples 7-12. 


६२६, ६३४. कम्मनि दुतियायं क्तो 
626, 634. Kammani dutiyayam kto. 


[Kammani+dutiyayamtkto. 3 words] 
[V] Kamma-icce'tasmim atthe dutiyayam vibhattiyam kattari 
kta-paccayo hoti. 


The affix “kta” is applied in the context of a kamma 
(object). 


764 


Unadi Kappa 


Note: This affix (क्त) is indeed a Sanskritized affix. It is similar to “ta” 


affix in the Kita section. So, it can be regarded as such. However, if it is 
taken as kta-affix, “k” has to be elided by 517. This affix is referred to 
sometimes as a k-conjoined “ta” affix by Pali scholars. Also see Sutta 
643 regarding this affix. 


(1) danam-alms. * dinno-gave. [Re Sutta 582] devadatto- 
Devadatta, i.e. Devadatta gave alms. [wa] da+ta (Shown before) 

(2) stlarh-moral precept. ® rakkhito-observed. devadatto. 
i.e. Devadatta observed precept. [wa] rakkha+ta 

(3) bhattam-food. * bhutto-ate. devadatto i.e. Devadatta ate food. 
[wa] bhuja+ta (Shown before in Sutta 578) 


(4) garurh-to the teacher. * upasito-cared or approached. devadatto 
i.e. Devadatta approached or cared the teacher. 
[wa] upaY dsa+ta 





६२७, ६५२. ख्यादीहि मन्‌ मचतो वा 
627, 652. Khya'dihi man, ma ca to va. 
[Khi-adihitman+matca+to+va. 6 words] 
[V] Khi,bhi,su,ru,hu,va,dhi,hi,la,pi,ada, ice'va'madihi 
dhatühi man-paccayo hoti, massa ca to hoti va. 





The affix “man” is applied after such roots as “khi, bhi, su, 
ru, hu, va, dhu, hi, lu, pi, ada etc." and the “m” of affix 
changes into a “t” in the word "atta-self". 


(1) khtyanti-(are) exhausted. upaddava-dangers. ettha'ti[ettha-iti] 
ettha-here. iti-therefore. ° khemo-safe place, i.e. Nibbana where 
dangers are exhausted (disappeared). [Adhikarana-sadhana ED] 
[wa] khi+man 

(2) [a] bhayitabbo’ ti [bhayitabbo+iti] bhayitabbo-should fear. iti 
* bhemo-something to fear, fearful. [Kamma-sadhana ED] 

[b] bhayanti-(are) afraid of. etasma’ti [etasma-iti] etasma- 
from this (shocking) object. iti va ® bhemo-shocking thing from 
which people fear. [Apadana-sadhana ED] [wa] bhi+man 

Note: There are two EDs for this word shown in two Sadhanas. 


765 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


(3) rarhsiyo-the rays. abhissaveti’ti [abhissaveti+iti] abhissaveti- 
(causes) to radiate. iti * somo-the moon which radiates the rays. 
[Hetu-kattu-sadhana ED] [wa] su+man 

(4) ravati gacchatr' ti [gacchati+iti] gacchati-(it) comes up. iti 
e romo-hair. [Kattu-sadhana] [wa] ru--man 

(5) huvati juhvati-sacrifices. etena’ti [etenatiti] etena-by this of- 
fering. iti * homo-offerings by means of which a sacrifice is per- 
formed. [Karana-sadhana] [wa] hu--man 

(6) [a]patilomavasena-by being opposite of the right side. vati 

gacchati' ti, gacchati-goes, (happens). iti ° vamo-left side 
which goes or happens as the opposite of right. 

[b] lamakavasena-by being lower mode. vati gacchati 
pavattatiti [pavattati+iti]. pavattati-happens. và iti 
* vamo-the left side (which happens as lower mode as per an- 
cient belief). [Kattu-sadhana] [wa] va+man [2 EDs for this 
word based on two different meaning of the root word “va’’] 

(7) dhunati kampatr'ti. kampati-(it) shakes. * dhümo-smoke 
which shakes, (is unstable). [Kattu-sadhana] [wa] dhü--man 

(8) setthabhavena-by being the best. hinoti pavattati-happens. 
cittam-mind, thought. etasmin’ti [etasmim-iti] etasmim-in this 
object (i.e. gold). iti * hemo-gold, where (human) mind happens to 
view it as the best (of all possessions). [Adhikarana-sadhana] 

[wa] hitman 

(9) [a] lunitabbo’ ti [lunitabbo+iti] lunitabbo-should shave, cut. iti 

* lomo-the hair which should be shaved or cut. 
[Kamma-sadhana] 

[b] mamsacammani-flesh and skins, lunati chindati'ti [chin- 
dati+iti] chindati-cuts. iti va ० lomo-the hair which cuts 
through flesh and skins when it grows. [Kattu-sadhana] 

[wa] li+man 

(10) [a] piyanarh-act of loving. * pemo-love. [Bhava-sadhana] 

[b] piyayitabbo'ti [piyayitabbo+iti] piyayitabbo-should love. 
iti và ° pemo-love. [Kamma-sadhana. 2 EDs] [wa] priman 

(11) [a] sukha,dukkharh-pleasure and pain. adati bhakkhatr'ti 

bhakkhati-consumes. iti ® atta-the body which consumes 


766 


Unadi Kappa 


both pleasure and pain (even though the mind doesn't like 
pain). [Kattu-sadhana] [wa] ada+man 

[b] jati,jara,marana’ dihi-by birth, old-age and death etc. 
adiyate-is taken. bhakkhiyate’ti [bhakkhiyate+iti] 
bhakkhryate-(is) devoured. iti va * atta, * atuma-the body 
devoured by birth, old-age and death etc. [Kamma-sadhana] 
[wa] ada+man 


६२८, ६५३. समादीहि थमा 

628, 653. Sama'dihi tha,ma. [Samu-adthi+tha, ma. 2 words] 

[V] Samu,damu,dara,raha,du,hi,si,bhi,d4,ya,sa,tha,bhasa- 
icce'va'madihi dhatuhi tha,ma,paccaya honti. 


The affixes “tha, ma" are applied after roots “samu, damu, 
dara, raha, du, hi, si, bhi, da, ya, sa, tha, bhasa" etc. 


(1) samet?’ti [sameti+iti] sameti-(it) calms the mind. iti 
* samatho-the samatha meditation which calms the mind. 
[Kattu-sadhana] [Wa] samu+tha 
(2) [a] damat?’ ti [damati+iti] damati-(it) tames, trains. iti 
* damatho-taming, training. [Kattu-sadhana] 
[wa] damu+tha 

[b] damanarh-act of taming, training. va ० damatho-taming, 
training. [Bhava-sadhana] 

[c] damitabbo’ti damitabbo-should train. va ° damatho- 
something or someone to be domesticated, or trained. 
[Kamma-sadhana.3 EDs] 

(3) darat?’ ti [darati+iti] darati-(it) exhausts. iti ° daratho-anxiety, 
stress. [Kattu-sadhana] [wa] dara+tha 
(4) [a] jinnabhavarh-to state of degeneration. rahissati 
ganhissatI’ti [ganhissati+iti] ganhissati-(it) will take up. iti 
* ratho-the chariot which will take up degeneration process (in 
the future). [Kattu-sadhana] [wa] rahat+tha 

[b] dabbasambhare-component parts (such as wheels, axles, 
etc.). rahati ganhati'ti [ganhatii+iti]. ganhati-takes up. iti 
và * ratho-chariot (which takes up various components to 
build it). [Kattu-sadhana] 


767 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


(5) [a] davati gacchatr'ti [gacchatit+iti] gacchati-(it) comes up. 
* dumo-tree which shoots up when growing. [Kattu-sadhana] 
[wa] du+ma 
[b] davati-grows. vuddhi virulhi-to the state of thriving and 
flourishing. gacchati-goes. pavattatT ti [pavattati+iti] 
pavattati-happens. uddharh-upward. iti va dumo-tree 
which grows, happens upward when thriving. [Kattu-sadhana] 
(6) pathavi, pabbatadisu-on earth and mountain etc. gacchati pa- 
tati’ti [patatititi] patati-falls. iti ® himo-the snow, which falls on 
the earth and mountains and so on. [Kattu-sadhana] 
[wa] hitma 
(7) [a] kammavacaya-by formal kammavaca. bandhati-binds, de- 
marcates. ettha'ti [etthatiti] ettha-here. iti ® SIMA-an ordi- 
nation hall (where boundaries) are demarcated by means of 
formal recitation of kammavaca and declaration of boundaries. 


[Adhikarana-sadhana] [wa] si*-ma 
[b] bandhitabba’ti. bandhitabba-should be demarcated. iti va 
e sima-an ordination hall (which should be) demarcated by 
means of formal recitation of kammavaca. [Kamma-sadhana] 
(8) bhayanti etasma’ti * bhimo-the object from which people fear. 
(Refer to 627) [Apadana-sadhana] [wa] bhi+ma 
(9) [a] satte-beings. avakhandenti nivarenti-prevents. etena’ ti 
[etena-iti] etena-by this. iti ० damo-preventive barrier of 
flower hedge. [Karana-sadhana] [wa] da+ma 
avakhandiyatr'ti [avakhandiyati+iti] avakhandiyati-(is) 
bitten. iti va * damo-floral works. [Kamma-sadhana] 
(10) yati gacchatr'ti gacchati-(it) passes. iti * yamo-the phases of 
night which passes. [Kattu-sadhana] [wa] yat+ma 
(11) paresarh-of others. cittarh-mind. ganhitum-to take. 
samatthetr't1 [samattheti+iti] samattheti-(is) able. iti ° samo- 
golden complexion of skin, which can attract other's mind. 
[Kattu-sadhana] [wa] sama 
(12) titthanti-stand. etena’ti etena-by this. ® thamo-energy by 
which people stand. [Karana-sadhana] [wa] tha+ma 
(13) bhasati bhasmitkartyatt’ ti [bhasmikariyati+iti] 


768 


Unadi Kappa 


bhasmikariyati-makes it so as to become ash, pulverize into ash. 
iti ° bhasma-ash. [Kattu-sadhana, Re: original verb *bhasati"] 
[wa] bhasa--ma 


६२९, ५६९. गहस्सुपधस्से वा 
629, 569. Gahassu’padhasse’ va. 
[Gahassa+upadhassa+e+va. 4 words] 
[V] Gaha-icce'tassa dhatussa upadhassa akarassa ettam hoti 
va. 
The penultimate vowel “a” of initial consonant “ga” of the 


66,99 


root “gaha” sometimes changes into “e”. [Look at example 
word to clarify the function of Sutta. It is quite simple and clear.] 
dabbasambhararh-building material. ganhat?’ti [ganhati-iti] 
ganhati-takes up. iti ° geham, * gaharh-house (which takes up 
various building materials to build). [Kattu-sadhana] [wa] gahata 


Note: upadha-penultimate syllable is called “upadha”. 
[upa-near by, closely--dha-kept, located. A near-by vowel is called 
“upadha’’]. 


६३०, ६५४. मसुस्स सुस्स च्छरच्छेरा 
630, 654. Masussa sussa cchara,cchera. 
[Masussa-*sussa-cchara, cchera. 3 words] 
[V] Masu-icce’tassa patipadikassa sussa cchara,cchera’desa 
honti. 


The “su” of patipadika word “masu” changes into “ccha- 
ra" and "cchera". 


maccharatr'ti [maccharati+iti] maccharati-is jealous of. iti 
e maccharo-jealousy. [wa] masu+kvi 

evam-similarly, 

e macchero-jealousy. [Kattu-sadhana] [wa] masut+kvi 
[Masu is not a root, but a patipadika. WA of both are the same] 


Note: A crude form of word without any applied vibhatti, paccaya in it, 
but which has its own specific meaning in a morphologically uncomple- 


769 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


ted state is called ^patipadika" which means an individual word sepa- 
rate from the completed word. [pati+padatika] 


६३१, ६५५. आपुब्बचरस्स च 

631, 655. Apubbacarassa Ca. [Apubbacarassatca. 2 words] 

[V] Apubbassa cara-icce'tassa dhatussa cchariya,cchara, 
cchera’desa honti, apubbassa ca rasso hoti. 


The root “cara” prefixed with an upasagga “a” changes 
into “echariya, cchara, cchera". In addition, the prefix 


८५८८८११ 


upasagga “a” is shortened as “a”. 


abhuso-intensely, very much. caritabban'ti. caritabbarh-should 
be treated, wondered. i.e. something which occurs in an amazing way 
and treated with awe, and disbelief. 


e acchariyam-wonderful. Both kn & adj [Kamma-sadhana] 
Evam 
° acchararh, ° accherarh-wonderful. [wa] āVcara+kvi 


Caggahanena masussa sussa’pi cchariya’deso hoti. 
By the word “ca”, the “su” of the word “masu” also chang- 


es into “cechariya”. 
e macchariyam-jealousy. [wa] masu+kvi 


६३२, ६५६. अल कळ सलेहि ल या 
632, 656. Ala,kala,salehi la,ya. 
[Ala, kala, salehitla, ya. 2 words] 
[V] Ala,kala,sala-icce’tehi dhatuhi la,ya-paccaya honti. 


The “la, ya" affixes are applied after the roots “ala, kala 
and sala". 


(1) alati samatthetr' ti, samattheti-is able. iti * allarh-wet. 
[Kattu-sadhana] [wa] ala+la 

(2) kalitabbam sankhyatabban’ ti [sankhyatabbarn-iti] 
sankhyatabbarh-should count as being fit. iti ® kallarh-suitable, 
fit, appropriate (adj). [Kamma-sadhana] [wa] kala+la 

(3) salati gacchati pavisati'ti pavisati-(it) enters (piercing.) 


770 


Unadi Kappa 


e sallarh-arrow, thorn etc. (which pricks or pierces). [Kattu- 
sadhana] [wa] salatla 

Evam 

* alyam-wet. [wa] alatya 

e kalyarh-suitable, fit. [wa] kalat+ya 

e salyarh-arrow, thorn etc. [wa] salatya 


६३३, ६५७. याणलाणा 
633, 657 Yana,lana. [Yana, lana. 1 word] 
[V] Tehi kala,sala-icce’tehi dhatühi yana,lana-paccaya honti. 


The “yana, lana” affixes are applied after those “kala, sa- 
la" roots respectively. 


(1) kalitabbam sankhyatabban’ti [Re: 632] ® kalyanam-good. 
[Kamma-sadhana] [wa] kalat+yana 

(2) ganato-from the crowd. patikkamitva-having left. salanti-stay. 
ettha'ti ettha-here. iti ® patisallanam-quiet place,(where one 
stays alone leaving crowd or friends). [Adhikarana-sadhana] 
[wa] pati-Vsala+lana 

Evam 

e sallano (See the next word for meaning). [wa] salat+lana 

० patisallano-quiet place of seclusion or such an act. 

[wa] patiVsalatlana 


६३४, ६५८. मथिस्स थस्स लो च 
634, 658. Mathissa thassa lo ca. 


[Mathissa+thassa+lo+ca. 4 words] 
[V] Matha-icce’tassa dhatussa thassa la'deso hoti. 


The component word “tha” of the root “matha”, changes 
into “la”. 


afifiamafifiarh-mutually, one against another. mathati vilolatr'ti 
[vilolati+iti] vilolati-wrestles. iti ° mallo, ° mallam-wrestler, box- 
er. [Kattu-sadhana] [wa] matha+a (Both are the same) 


Caggahanena lato ko ca agamo hoti. 


771 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


By the word “ca”, an additional “ka” is to be added after 
the “la”. 


e mallako, ° mallakam-wrestler, boxer. 
[wa] matha+a (Both are the same) 


६३५, ५५९. पेसातिसग्गपत्तकालेसु किच्चा 
635, 559. Pesa’tisagga, pattakalesu kicca. 


[Pesa, atisagga, pattakalesutkicca. 2 words] 
[V] Pesa,atisagga,pattakala-icce’tesva’tthesu kiccapaccaya 
honti. 


The “kicca” affixes are applied to express “pesa-command, 
atisagga-permission, pattakala-telling due time to do 
something". 

Summary: This Sutta shows where and when the suffixes shown in the 
examples are used. Even though it is referred generally as Kicca, there 
is more relevancy to “tabba” and “antya” as these are two affixes 
widely used as verbs of the said meaning. 


(1) * kattabbam-should be done. kammam-work. bhavata-by 
your honorable. [wa] kara+tabba 
Three meanings as per the rule of this Sutta 
(a) Your honorable must do work. [pesa, command]. 
(b) Your honorable can do work [atisagga, permission]. 
(c) Work should be done by your honorable 
[pattakala, expressing the due time and obligation]. 


(2) * karantyam-should do. kiccarh-the matter, case. bhavata, 
[wa] karat+antya 
i.e. The matter should be carried out by your honorable. 

(3) * bhottabbam-should eat. bhojanam-meal. bhavata. 
[wa] bhuja+tabba 
i.e. The meal should be eaten by your honorable. 

(4) * bhojantyarh-should eat. bhojanam bhavata, 
[wa] bhuja*aniya 
i.e. The meal should be eaten by your honorable. 

(5) * ajjhayitabbam-should recite. ajjheyyarh-the thing to recite. 
bhavatà. [wa] adhi-Ni+tabba 
i.e. It should be recited by your honorable. 





772 


Unadi Kappa 


(6) * ajjhayantyam-should recite. ajjheyyam bhavata. 
[wa] adhi-V itantya 
i.e. The text should be recited by your honorable. 


६३६, ६५९. अवस्सकाधमिणेसु णी च 
636, 659. Avassaka’dhaminesu ni ca. 
[Avassaka, adhaminesu+ni+ca. 3 words] 
[V] Avassaka,adhamina-icce tesva'tthesu ni-paccayo hoti 
kicca ca. 


When expressing a sure action or event and a debt owed to 
someone, a "pr" affix as well as other kicca affixes can also 
be applied. 


Avassake tava—(Examples) in expressing sure action: 

(1) ° karr'si [karrrasi] kart-doer. asi-(you) are [Refer to Sutta 496 
for understanding this word]. me-my. kammam-work. avas- 
sam-surely. 

i.e. You are surely to do my work. [wa] kara+ni 

(2) ° harr'si [hartt+asi] hari-carrier. asi me bharam-load or burden. 
avassam-surely, i.e. You are surely to carry my burden or load. 
[wa] hara-ni 


Adhamine-(Examples) in the expression of debt: 

(1) * dayr'si [dayrrasi] dayi-giver. asi me satam-hundred. inarh- 
debt i.e. You are to pay a hundred debt of mine. [wa] da+ni 

(2) ° dhari’si [dhart+asi] dhàri-carrier. asi me sahassam- 
thousand. inarh-debt. i.e. You carry (i.e. owe) a thousand debt to 


me. [wa] dhara+ņī 


Kiccà ca—The examples of kicca-affixes: 

(1) * databbam-should pay. me-my. bhavata satam inam. 
i.e. My one hundred debt should be paid by your honorable. 
[wa] da+tabba 

(2) ° dharayitabbarh-should carry. me bhavata sahassam inam. 
i.e. You should be carrying my one thousand debt by your honora- 
ble. [So, you are obliged to pay back it to me.] 
[wa] dhara+tabba 


773 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


(3) * kattabbam-should do. me bhavata geharh-house. 
i.e. My home should be done by your honorable (please build a 
home for me now). [wa] kara+tabba 

(4) * karantyam-should do. me bhavata kiccam-matter, 
i.e. My matter should be done by your honorable (do it for me). 
[wa] karat+antya 

(5) * kariyam-should do (prepare). me bhavata sayanarh-bed. 
i.e. My bed should be made by your honorable (please prepare bed 
for me). [wa] kara*nya 


६३७, o. अरहसक्कादीहि तुं 
637,...Araha,sakkadihi tum. 
[Araha, sakka-adihi*tum. 2 words] 
[V] Araha,sakka,bhabba-icce'vamadihi payoge sati 
sabbadhatühi turh-paccayo hoti. 


The affix “tum” is applied after all roots in the contexts of 
araha-worthiness, sakka-ability and bhabba-possibility, likeli- 
hood and so on, to express those meanings. 


Examples used in context of “araha-being deserved, worthiness” : 
(1) araha-deserves. bhavarh-your honorable. ® Vatturh-to speak, 
i.e. Your honorable deserves to speak (you should speak). 
[wa] vada+tum 
(2) araha bhavar ® kattum-to do. [wa] karat+turh 
i.e. Your honorable deserves to do (you should do). 
Examples used in context of “sakka-ability and capacity”: 
(1) sakka-is able. bhavam ° hanturh-to kill, 
i.e. Your honorable is able to kill. [wa] hana+turh 
(2) sakka bhavam * janetum * janitum [wa] jana+turh (both 
the same) * bhaviturh-to let it happen. [wa] bht+turh 
i.e. Your honorable is able to let it happen (you can make it happen). 
Note: janetum, janiturh and bhaviturh have the same meaning. 
(3) sakka bhavam * datum-to give. 
i.e. Your honorable is able to give (you can give it). [wa] datum 
(4) sakka bhavam ® ganturh-to go. 
i.e. Your honorable is able to go (you can go). [wa] gamu+turh 


774 


Unadi Kappa 


Examples in context of “babba-possibility, likelihood and future pro- 
spect”: 
(1) bhabbo-is likely. bhavam ° janetum-to cause it happen. 
i.e. Your honorable is likely to cause it happen. [wa] shown 
icce’va’madi. 


६३८, ६६०. वजादीहि पब्बज्जादयो निप्पज्जन्ते 
638, 660. Vaja'dihi pabbajja'dayo nippajjante. 
[Vaja-adthit+pabbajja-adayotnippajjante. 3 words] 
[V] Vaja-icce’vamadithi dhatthi, upasaggapaccayadihi ca 
pabbajja'dayo sadda nippajjante. 


The words “pabbajja” etc., which has the root *vaja-to go, 
prefixed with pa" and other words with various affixes and 
upasagga prefixes, can be duly completed by means of this 
Sutta. 


Examples with *nya" affix: 

(1) pathama'meva [pathamarh+eva] pathamam eva-the first only. 
vajitabba'ti [vajitabba-iti] vajitabba-should go. iti ° pabbajja- 
spiritual life such as monastic life etc. which should be first in sig- 
nificance. [Kamma-sadhana] [wa] paVvajatnya 

(2) ifijanam-trembling. ® ejjà-trembling. [wa] ijitnya 

(3) samajjanam-moving in joyous manner. * Samajja-entertainment 
show, festival. [wa] Sarn-Vaja--nya 

(4) nistdanath-sitting. * nisajja-sitting. [wa] niVsadatnya 

(5) vijananam-knowing. * vijja-knowledge. [wa] vida+nya 

(6) visajJanam-answering. ® visajja-answer. [wa] viVsajatnya 

(7) padanam-going. ° pajja-going. [wa] padat+nya 

(8) hananam-killing. ° vajjha-killing. [wa] hanat+nya 

Note: The root “hana” has to be changed into “vadha” by Sutta 592 and 

later completed by this Sutta. 


(9) esanam-wanting. * iccha-wish, desire. [wa] isut+nya 

(10) ati-esanam-wanting very much [ati-very much+esanarh-want- 
ing]. * aticcha-strong, excessive wish. [wa] ati-Visu--nya 

(11) abhi-esanam-wanting very much [abhi-very much+esanarh- 
wanting]. * abhiccha-strong, excessive wish. 


775 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


[wa] abhi-Visutnya 

(12) sadanam-being fatigued. * Sajja-fatigue. [2-11, All are Bhava- 
sadhana EDs] [wa] sada+nya 

(13) sayanti-lie down. ettha’ ti [etthatiti] ettha-here. iti ® seyya- 
bed where people lie down. [Adhikarana-sadhana] [wa] sitnya 


Examples with “kvi” affix: 

(14) samma-well. cittam-the mind. nidheti-keeps. etaya'ti 
[etayatiti] etaya-by this faith. iti ® saddha-faith by which one 
can keep one's mind well-convinced. [Karana-sadhana] 

[wa] Sarn-Vdhatkvi 
(15) caritabba-should practice. ® cariyà-the practice, conduct. 
[Kamma-sadhana] [wa] cara--kvi 


Example with “nya” affix: 
(16) karanarh-act of doing. ® kiriya-action. [Bhava-sadhana] 
[wa] kara--nya (this word has other affix in Sutta 554) 
Examples with “cha” affix: 
(17) rujanam-afflicting. * ruccha-affliction with ailment. 
[wa] rujatcha 
(18) padanarh-reaching. * paccha-reaching. [wa] padat+cha 
(19) rificanarh-retiring to be alone. ® riccha-retirement from crowd. 
[wa] ricatcha 
(20) tikicchanarh-curing. ® tikiccha-cure [wa] kita+cha 
(21) samkocanam-withholding. ® samkuccha-withholding. 
[wa] sarnVkucat+cha 
(22) madanam-being mad. ० maccha-madness. [wa] mada+cha 
(23) labhanam-obtaining. ® laccha-attainment. [All Bhava-sadhana] 
[wa] labha+cha 
(24) [a] raditabba’ ti [raditabba-iti] raditabba-should etch. iti 
* raccha-road (which looks like an etched line on the surface 
of the earth). [Kamma-sadhana] 
[b] radanam vilekhanam-etching. và ° raccha-etching. 
[Bhava-sadhana] [wa] rada*cha 
(25) adhobhagena-by lower portion (with one's body being down- 
ward). gacchat?’ti [gacchatititi] gacchati-goes. iti ® tiraccha, 
* tiracchano-the animal (which goes with one's belly horizontal- 


776 


Unadi Kappa 


ly downward). [Kattu-sadhana] [wa] tira+cha 
(26) ajanarh-strolling. ® accha-stroll. [Bhava-sadhana] 
[wa] aja*cha 
Example with “kha” affix: 
(27) titikkhatr'ti [titikkhati+iti] titikkhati-(He) bears. iti 
e titikkha-patience. [Kattu-sadhana] [wa] tijatkha 
Examples with “cha” affix: 
(28) saha-together. agamanam-coming. ° sagacchà-coming to- 
gether, congress. [wa] saha-saddüpapada, aVgamutcha 
Note: “Saha” becomes “sa”. sa-togehert+4-gaccha-coming. 
(29) dutthu-badly. bhakkhanarh-eating. ° dobhaccha-bad eating. 
[wa] duvbhasa+cha 
(30) dutthu-bad. rosanam-harassing. ° duruccha-bad harassment. 
[wa] duvrusa+cha 
(31) pucchanam-questioning. * puccha-question. 
[wa] pucchatcha 
(32) muhanam-being confused. * mucchà-confusion. 
[wa] muha+cha 
(33) vasanam-staying. * vaccha-stay. [wa] vasa+cha 
(34) kacanam-shining. ® kaccha-shine. [wa] kaca+cha 
(35) saha-together. kathanam-talking. ® sakaccha-discussion. 
[wa] saha-saddipapadat+katha+cha [“saha” becomes *sa"] 
(36) tudanam-poking. ° tuccha-poking. [wa] tuda+cha 
(37) visanath-entering. * viccha-entry. [wa] visatcha 
Example with “chilla” affix: 
(38) pisanarh-crushing. ® picchilla-crushed. [27 to 37 are Bhava- 
sadhana EDs] [wa] pisa-*chilla 
Example with “cha” affix: 
(39) sukha,dukkham-happiness and suffering. mudati 
bhakkhatr'ti [bhakkhati+iti] bhakkhati-consumes. iti 
* macco-a living being who has to consume (i.e. bear) pleasure 
and pain (of life). [Kattu-sadhana] [wa] mudat+cha 
Example with “tyu” affix: 
(40) sattanarh-of beings. panarh-life. museti-snatches. cajeti ti 


777 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


[cajeti+iti] cajeti-causes to abandon. iti * maccu-death which 
snatches and takes away the life of beings. [Kattu-sadhana] 
[wa] musattyu 

Examples with “tya” affix: 

(41) satanarh-being perpetually true. ० saccam-truth. [Bhava- 
sadhana, neuter gender word] [wa] satat+tya 

(42) uddharh-upward, on and on. dhunati kampatt’ti [kampatititi] 
kampati-flutters, agitated. ० uddhaccam-restlessness of mind. 
[Kattu-sadhana] [wa] uVdhu+tya 

Note: This word can also be a Bhava-taddhita word with affix “nya”. 

The base structural pattern is uddhata-being restless*nya-the state of. 


uddhata is a Kita-noun [uVdhara+ta]. u-upward, on and on, dhara-to 
be carried away+ta-past perfect suffix i.e. restlessness] 


(43) natanam-dancing. * naccam-dance. [Bhava-sadhana] 
[wa] nata-tya 

(44) nitanam-being perpetual. ° niccam-always, perpetually (adj). 
[Bhava-sadhana] [wa] nitit+tya 

Example with “cha” affix: 

(45) tathanam-being true. * taccharh-true. [Bhava-sadhana] 
[wa] tathat+cha 

icce'va'madi. 


६३९, ५८५, क्विलोपो च 
639, 585. Kvilopo Ca. [Kvilopotca. 2 words] 
[V] Kvilopo hoti. Puna ca nippajjante. 


The affix “kvi” is to be elided (so that all other necessary 
morphological procedures can be carried out for the com- 
pletion of “kvi-affixed” words). 


(1) [a] vividhehi-various. siladigunehi-by virtues such as sila etc. 
bhavatr'ti [bhavati+iti] bhavati-is, becomes. iti * vibhü-the 


one who becomes a supreme being by means of various virtues. 
i.e. Buddha. 


[b] visesena-specially. va bhavatr'ti * vibhü-the one who spe- 
cially happens or arises. [wa] vi-Nbhü--kvi [Re: Sutta 530] 


778 


Unadi Kappa 


(2) sayam attana-oneself. bhavatr'ti e sayambhü-self-enlightened 
Buddha. [wa] sayam-saddüpapada-bhü--kvi 

(3) abhibhavitva-having overcome (all obstacles). bhavatt’ ti 
* abhibhü-the one who arises (emerges) by overcoming all obsta- 
cles. [wa] abhivbhü-kvi 

(4) sar sutthu-well. dhunati-shakes. kampati’ti ° sandhü- 
something that shakes well. [wa] sam vdhu-kvi 

(5) visesena bhati-shines. dibbatr'ti [dibbatit+iti] dibbati-shines. 
iti * vibha-specially shining light. [wa] vivbhatkvi 

(6) nissesena-thoroughly. bhati dibbatr'ti ® nibha-thoroughly 
shining light. [wa] ni-Vbha+kvi 

(7) pakarena-variously. bhati dibbatr'ti ° pabha-variously shining 
light. [wa] paVbha+kvi 

(8) saha-together. bhasanti-speak. ettha’ti, ettha-here in this meet- 
ing. * Sabha-conference where people talk together. [Adhikarana- 
sadhana ED] [wa] saha-saddipapada+bhasatkvi 

Note: “saha” changes into “sa”. [ettha’ti-ettha+iti] 

(9) a bhuso-very much. bhati-shines. dibbati’ti ® abha-intense 
light. [wa] aVbhatkvi [Here, upasagga particle “a” is intensifier 
which is further explained by a synonymous word *bhuso"]. 

(10) bhujena kutilena-by being twisted, in zigzag. gacchati'ti 

* bhujago. [Re: Sutta 530] 

(11) turita,turito-speedily. gacchati'ti ® turago-the horse which 

goes by galloping speed. [wa] tura-saddipapada-gamutkvi 
(12) sam sutthu-well. pathavirh-earth. khanati'ti [khanati-iti] 
khanati-digs, burrows. * sankho-conch. [Re: Sutta 530] 

(13) visesena yamati-abstains. uparamati'ti [uparamatititi] 
uparamati-abstains. ® viyo-special abstinence. 
[wa] viVyamu-kvi 

(14) sutthu-well. manati-knows. janatr'ti [janatr'ti] Janati-knows. 
iti * sumo-a person so-named or the wise person. 
[wa] suVmanatkvi 

(15) pari samantato-from all around. tanoti-extends. vittharet? ti 
[vitthareti+iti] vitthareti-spreads. iti ® parito-the width all 





779 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


across, diametrically. [All, except 8, are Kattu-sadhana EDs] 
[wa] pariVtanu+kvi 
Note: Normally, this word is an indeclinable which means “from all 
around”, an upasagga “pari” which is affixed with indeclinable affix 
“to”. (Re: Sutta 248). 
icce'va'madi. 


६४०, o. सचजानं कगा णानुबन्धे 
640,...Saca,janam ka,ga na’nubandhe. 
[Sa, ca, janam-ka, ga*na-anubandhe. 3 words] 
[V] Saca,janarh dhatüna' mantanam ca,janam ka,ga’desa honti 
yathasankhyam na’nubandhe paccaye pare. 


The root-end consonants “९, j" of certain roots, change into 
“k, g” respectively when an n-conjoined affix is applied 
after the roots. [Similar function with Sutta 623] 


* oko [Re Sutta 528]. 

* pako [Re: Sutta 529, 623]. 

e seko-pouring. [wa] sicat+na 

e soko-sorrow. [wa] sucatna 

० viveko-quiet solitude. [wa] vi-Vvicatna 

* cago [Re: Sutta 529, 621]. 

* yogo [Re: Sutta 623]. 

* bhogo-That which should be properly used, wealth. 
[wa] bhuja*na 

* rogo [Re: Sutta 528]. 

* rago [Re: Sutta 590]. 

* bhago [Re: Sutta 529]. 

* bhango * rango * sango 
[Re: Sutta 607 for these three examples]. 





780 


Unadi Kappa 


६४१, ५७२. नुदादीहि युण्वून मनाननाकाननका सकारितेहि च 

641, 572. Nuda'dihi 
yu,nviina’mana’nana’ka’nanaka 
sakaritehi ca. 


[Nuda-adthit+yu, nviinarh+ana, anana, aka, ananaka+ 
sakaritehi*ca. 5 words] 

[V] Nuda,suda,jana,su,lu,hu,pu,bhu,fia,asa,samu-icce’va’ 
madihi dhatühi, phanda,citi,ana-icce’ va’ madihi sakaritehi 
ca yu,nvünam paccayanam ana,anana,aka,ananaka' desa 
honti yathasankhyam kattari, bhava,karanesu ca. 


The “yu, nvu-affixes” which have senses of Kattu, Bhava 
and Karana, being applied after the root “nuda, sūda, jana, 
su, li, hu, pu, bhū, fia, asa, samu” etc. and other roots 
such as “phanda, citi, ana", which also have causative af- 
fixes, change into “ana”, *anana", “aka” and “ananaka” 
respectively. 


ea 


Note: This Sutta changes “yu, nvu-affixes” into "ana", "anana", 
“aka” and *ananaka". Please carefully note the systematic order of 
functions to be applied. Usually the functions applied in 3, 4 (see be- 
low) will be either Hetu-Kattu or Hetu-Kamma Sadhana, a very special 
combined type of Sadhana. Below is the order of functions to be ap- 
plied according to the applied affixes. 


(1) The “yu” affix (applied in the sense of Kattu, bhava or 
Karana) > ana. 

(2) The “pvu” affix (applied in the sense of Kattu, bhava or 
Karana) > aka. 

(3) The “yu” affix plus a causative suffix> anana. 

(4) The ordinary “nvu” affix plus a causative suffix> 
ananaka. 


Kattari tava—(Examples with “yu” affix) in the sense of Kattu (doer, 

agent), in ana-function: 

(1) panudatr'ti [panudati+iti] panudati-extracts. iti ® panüdano- 
extractor. [Kattu-sadhana] [wa] paVnudatyu 


781 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


Evam 

(2) ° südano-something which flows. [wa] sudat+yu 

(3) * janano-maker. [wa] janat+yu 

(4) ° savano-listener. [wa] sutyu 

(5) * lavano-cutter. [wa] lü--yu 

(6) * havano-sacrificer. [wa] hu+yu 

(7) ° pavano-purifier. [wa] puttyu 

(8) * bhavano-something which arises, ariser. [wa] bhū+yu 
(9) ° àno-something which knows, knowledge. [wa] fia-yu 
(10) * asano-eater. [wa] asatyu 

(11) * samano-calmer, the one who is calm, monk. [wa] samu+yu 


Bhave ca—Examples with “yu” affix in the sense of Bhava (action): 
(1) panudate-act of extraction. ® panüdanamr-extraction. [Bhava- 
sadhana] 
Evam 
(2) ° südanam-flowing. 
(3) * jananarh-arising. 
(4) * savanarh-listening. 
(5) * lavanarh-cutting. 
(6) ° havanath-sacrificing. 
(7) * pavanam-purification. 
(8) * bhavanarh-arising. 
(9) * hanam-knowing. 
(10) ° asanarh-eating. 
(11) * samanam-being calm. 
Note: WA of these examples are the same as foregoing ones except the 
neuter gender ending of these words. 
Examples of “yu+causative” affix, in anana-function: 
(12) * safijananarh-causing to know well, educating. 

[wa] sam Vfüa-yu 
(13) * kuyate-sounding. ® kananarh-act of sounding. 

[All Bhava-sadhana] [wa] ku+yu 


782 


Unadi Kappa 

Karite ca—Examples with “causative nape-affix", “yu” affixes in 
Bhava sense, ana-function: 
(1) phandapiyate-causing to shake * phandapanam-causing to 

shake. [Bhava-sadhana] [wa] phadit+“nape+yu” [dual affixes] 
(2) cetaptyate-causing to incite. ० cetapanam-inciting. 

[wa] citi--^nape--yu" [two affixes] 
(3) anapiyate-causing to command ® anapanam-command. 

[wa] anat+“napet+yu” [Bhava-sadhana] [two affixes] 


Karane-Examples with “yu” affix in the sense of Karana (Instru- 
ment, supporting cause) ana-function: 
(1) nudanti-extract. anena'ti [anena+iti] anena-by this. iti 
e nudanarh-that by which things are extracted. [Karana-sadhana] 
[wa] nudatyu 
Evam 
(2) * südanam-that by which it flows. i.e. the source of flow. 
(3) * jananarh-that by which it arises. i.e. the cause of something. 
(4) * savanam-that by which one listens. i.e. the source of hearing. 
(5) * lavanam-that by which it is cut. i.e. the sickle etc. 
(6) * havanarh-that by which one sacrifices. i.e. the food or flower 
etc. 
(7) * pavanam-that by which one is purified. i.e. act of penance etc. 
(8) * bhavanam-that by which it arises. i.e. the cause. 
(9) * Nanarh-that by which one knows. i.e. knowledge. 
(10) * asanam-that by which one eats. i.e. the hand etc. 
(11) * samanam-that by which one calms. i.e. the meditation etc. 
Note: WA of these examples are the same as foregoing ones except the 


neuter gender ending of these words. Keep in mind that the words “that 
by which" are literalized interpretations reflective of Karana sadhana. 


Puna kattari—Again, examples with “nvu” affix in the sense of Kat- 
tu, aka-function: 

See the underlined verbs of EDs which signifies a Kattu-sadhana be- 
fore each example. The verbs of ED are affixed in invisible “a” affix of 
Kattu-sense in the present tense. That is why it is called Kattu-sadhana 
EDs). 

(1) nudatr'ti [nudati+iti] nudati-(one) extracts. 


* nudako-extractor. [wa] nuda*nvu 


783 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


(2) sudati’ ti [sudatiHiti] stidati-(it) flows. iti ® sidadhako-that 
which flows. [wa] sidat+nvu 
(3) janet?’ ti [janeti+iti] janeti-(it) causes, or causes to born (causative 
verb). iti ® janako-a cause, father. [wa] janat+nvu 
(4) sunot?’ ti [sunoti+iti] sunoti-(one) listens. iti ® savako-the one 
who obeys guidance, a disciple, a follower. [wa] su+nvu 
(5) [पावत ti [lunati+iti] lunati-cuts (crops). iti ° lavako-harvester, 
cutter. [wa] li+nvu 
(6) juhotr' ti [juhoti-iti] juhoti-(one) sacrifices. iti ० havako- 
sacrificer. [wa] hu-*nvu 
(7) punat? ti [punati+iti] punati-(it) purifies. iti * pavako-purifier, 
fire. [wa] pu*nvu 
(8) bhavati’ ti [bhavati+iti] bhavati-(it) arises. ° bhavako- 
something which arises, developer. [wa] bhit+nvu 
(9) janati'ti [janati+iti] Janati-(one) knows. iti ® janako-someone 
who knows, knower. [wa] jana*nvu 
(10) * asatt’ti [asatititi] asati-(one) eats. iti ® asako-consumer. 
[wa] asa*nvu 
(11) upasatr'ti [upasati+iti] upasati-(one) closely follows. iti 
° upasako-follower, devotee. [wa] upaVasa+nvu 
(12) samett'ti [sameti+iti] sameti-(it) calms. iti ° samako-that 
which calms. [All Kattu-sadhana] [wa] samu-*nvu 











Karite tu—Examples with causative “napaya” and "nvu" affix in 
sense of causative Kattu voice (Causative Agent), aka-function: (The 
examples shown below are very unique as there are causative affixes in 
verb of ED and example. They are formally called *Hetu-Kattu 
sadhana", a rare form of Sadhana. Causative verbs of ED! and finished 
words of Hetu-kattu sadhana? are shown in superscript numbers.) 

(1) phandapayati'ti [phandapayatititi] 'phandapayati-(is) caused 
to be shaken. iti ० ?phandápayako-something causing to be shak- 
en, the shaker, the cause of commotion. [Hetu-Kattu-sadhana] 

[wa] phadi+‘napayatnvu” [Two affixes] 
Evam 

(2) ° ?ànapayako-something causing to be commanded, the com- 

mand-giver. [wa] ana**napaya*nvu" 


784 


Unadi Kappa 


(3)* ?cetápayako-something causing to be incited, the instigator. 
[wa] citi+“napayatnvu” 
Examples of ananaka-function with causative+nvu affixes: 
(4) * ?safijananako-something or someone causing to know, enlight- 
ener or an educator. [wa] sarn Vā+“ņāpetņvu” 


६४२, ५८८. इयतमकिंएसान मन्तस्सरो दीघं क्वचि दिसस्स गुणं दो रं 
सक्खीच 

642, 588. Lya,ta,ma,ki,e,sana' mantassaro digham 

kvaci disassa gunam do ram sa,kkhr'ca. 

[L ya, ta, ma, ki, e, sanarnt+antassaro+digham+kvaci+tdisassat+gunarmn+ 

do-*ram-sa, kkha, r*ca. 10 words] 

[V] I,ya,ta,ma,ki,esa-icce’tesarh sabbanamana' manto saro 
digha' mapajjate kvaci. 
Disa-icce'tassa? dhatussa i-karo *°guna’mapajjate. Dakaro 
rakara’ mapajjate. 





55 dusa-icce’tassa dhatusassa u-karo guna’mApajjate (These are originally 
found words in earlier texts which seems like a corrupted text. This might 
had happened due to copyist’s errors over many years during which time the 
copies of text are manually copied. There is no root “dusa” in the Sutta but 
the root “disa-to see, to view"). 

disa-iccetassa dhatusassa i-karo guna’mapajjate (The edited text, which is 
relevant and reflective of the words “disassa gunam" contained in the Sutta). 
The meaning of these words in this sentence do not carry much significant 
weight in expounding any additional particular injunction of Sutta as it only 


ee 


reiterates the third function of changing “sa” of the root into “1 


5 This Sutta is the only place where usage of the term “guna” is found. Here, 
Guna merely means “times increase in the metrical nature". This term “guna” 
as well as the grammatical concept of a “guna” is seldom found as an applied 
grammatical concept in the Kaccayana Pali grammar like the way it is widely 
applied in the Sanskrit grammars. Instead, Pali grammarians apply *vuddhi" 
as the applied concept in matters of morphology. To see the difference and to 
compare, refer to Sutta 406, 407 of Kaccayana and Panini Sutta 1-1-1 


785 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


dhatva’ntassa sassa ca sa,kkha,r-icce'te adesa honti 
yathasambhavam. 

Ete sadda sakena sakena namena yatha' nuparodhena Bud- 
dhasasane paccha puna nippajjante. 


The component vowels “i, ya, ta, ma, ki, e, sa", which are 
parts of their respective Sabbanama nouns change into 
digha (long vowels). 

The vowel “i” of the root “disa” changed into a guna 
The letter “d” of the root “disa” changes into an “r” and the 
component consonant "s" of the root “disa” changes into 
"sa, kkha, 1". 

Each of these words are to be morphologically completed 
not contravening the prevalent usage in the Pali texts. 


6८३११ 
l. 


Explanation 
On Parts of Sabbanama Nouns and Three Functions of Sutta 

I is part of ima (this), ya is part of ya (which), ta is part of ta (that), 
ma is part of amha (me), ki is part of kim (what, interrogative), e is 
part of eta (that), sa is part of samana (same, similar). 
(1) Of all these, all “i, a” vowels in each sabbanama-words ex- 

cept “e” of “eta”, are to undergo the “digha” process of 

lengthening. Thus, each is lengthened as “1, ya, ta, ma, ki, 


a”? 


sa. 
(2) The “d” of the root word “disa” changes into an “r”. 
(3) "s" of “disa” changes into “sa, kkha, T”. [Changing "s" of “disa” 
into *s" 1s a redundant function of affirmation.] 
Note: There is a hidden function not shown in the Vutti of Sutta. It is to 
change “amha” into “ma”, “eta” into “e” and "samana" into “sa” by this 
Sutta and to lengthen inherent vowels into digha. In Rüpasiddhi, it is said: 
“ma-iti nipatanena amhasaddassa madeso. 
e-iti nipatanena etasaddassa ekaro. 
sa-iti nipatanena samanasaddassa sadeso, ta'dantassa và 0810”. 


(वृद्धिरादैच) and 1-1-2 (अदेङ गुणः). 


786 


Unadi Kappa 


(Rüpasiddhi Grammar, Sutta 588) 


There is also a Sutta (समानेदं किमदः Aaaa) in the Mugdhabhoda Sanskrit 
grammar with somewhat similar function which changes “samana” into “sa”, 


4409 


“idam” into T^, “kim?” into kr" and “ada” into “amu”. 


The following are examples where the lengthening procedure of digha 


८८,292 


process takes place in the initial vowels excluding “e” of “eta”. Only one 
function is applied in these examples. 


(1) ima" miva [imarh+iva] imam iva-like this person. narh-to that 
person. passati’ti [passati-iti] passati-(he) sees. iti ® Idiso-such- 
like person or such-kind-of person. 

[wa] ima-saddiipapada-disat+kvi 

(2) ya’miva [yarh+iva] yam 1va-like any person. nam passati’ ti 
e yadiso-any-kind-of person. [Wa] ya-saddüpapada-disa--kvi 

(3) ta^ miva [tarhtiva] tar iva-like that person. nam passatr'ti 
e tadiso-that-kind-of person. [wa] ta-saddüpapada-disa-*kvi 

(4) ma'miva [marh+iva] mam iva-like me. nam passati’ti 
* madiso-me-like person, or a person like me. 

[wa] amha-saddipapada-disat+kvi 

(5) kim’ iva [kirn*iva] kim iva-like who. nam passatt’ti ® kidiso- 
which kind of person. [wa] kirh-saddiipapada-disat+kvi 

(6) eta’ miva [etam+iva] etam iva-like that person. nam passatr'ti 
e ediso-that-kind-of person. [wa] eta-saddiipapada-disat+kvi 

Note: “eta” changes into “6” by this Sutta. If this function is not ap- 

plied, then the lengthening procedure is applicable thereby resulting in 

the word form “etadiso”, which is also widely found in the Pali texts. 

(7) samana' miva [samanarhtiva] samanam iva-like same person. 
nam passati’ti * sadiso-similar-kind-of person. [All Kattu- 
sadhana EDs] [wa] samana-saddüpapada-disa--kvi 

In the following examples, besides a digha process in the initial 

vowels, “d” of the root “disa” also changes into “r”. However, the 


meanings and ED of each example and WA are the same. See all 
the examples carefully to clarify two applied functions. 


(1) ima’ miva nam passati'ti ® Triso. 
(2) ya miva nam passati'ti * yariso. 
(3) ta miva nam passati'ti ® tariso. 
(4) ma’ miva nam passati’ti ° màriso. 


787 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


(5) kim’ iva nam passati’ti ® kiriso. 
(6) eta’miva nam passati'ti ® eriso. 

[one “r” changing function only, no digha function] 
(7) samana'miva nam passatr'ti ® sariso. [All Kattu-sadhana] 
In the following examples, apart from a digha process in the initial 
vowels, “s” of the root “disa” changes into “kkh”. The meanings and 
all EDs of each example and WA are the same though. 


(1) ima’ miva nam passati’ti * 1dikkho. 

(2) ya miva nam passati’ti * yadikkho. 

(3) ta miva nam passatt'ti * tadikkho. [Kattu-sadhana] 

Evam 

(4) * madikkho. 

(5) * kidikkho. 

(6) * edikkho. 

(7) * sadikkho. 

In the following examples, besides digha process, “sa” of the root 
“disa” changes into an ‘T’. The meanings and ED of each examples 
and WA are the same. 

(1) ° Idi. (2) * yadi. (3) ° tādī. (4) ° mad. (5) ° kidr. (6) ° edi. 
(7) * sadi. 


Caggahanena tesa' meva saddanam i, ya, icce’va’madina’ 
manto ca saro kvaci dighatta’mahu. 
By means of the word *ca" in Sutta, those initial vowels of 


“i, ya, etc.” are said to be made into a “digha”. 

This function is already shown in the main Sutta. Hence, it seems like 
redundant. Note that there is no “digha” process in four examples 
shown with this asterisk mark * [WA of each example is the same as 
shown before] 


(1) * 1dikkho. (2) ° yadikkho. (3) ° tadikkho. 
(4) * madikkho. (5) * kidikkho. (6) ** edikkho. 
(7) * sadikkho-same-kind-of-person. 

[wa] samana-saddüpapada-disa--kvi 

(WA of 2, 3, 4 below are the same as this) 
(1) * Idiso. [wa] ima-saddüpapada-disa--kvi. 


788 


Unadi Kappa 


No digha in three examples below. 
(2) ** sadiso-same-kind-of-person. 
(3) ** sariso-same-kind-of-person. 
(4) ** sarikkho-same-kind-of person. 


६४३, ६३५. भ्यादीहि मतिबुधिपूजादीहि च क्तो 
643, 635. Bhya'dihi mati,budhi,puja’dihi ca kto. 
[Bhi-adihimati, budhi, pūja-ādīhi+ca+kto. 4 words] 
[V] Bhr-icce'va'madihi dhatuhi, matibudhi,puja’ dito ca 
kta-paccayo hoti. 


The affix “kta” is applied after the roots “bhi, mana (mati 
refers to the root word mana-to know), budha (budhi refers to the 
root budha-to know), püja" etc. 


(1) bhayitabbo’ti [bhayitabbo+iti] bhayitabbo-should fear. iti 
* bhito-feared. [wa] bhi+ta 
(2) supitabbo’ti [supitabbo+iti] supitabbo-should sleep. iti 
* sutto-slept. [wa] supatta 
(3) mijjitabbo sinehetabbo-should like or admire. iti ° mitto- 
friend that should be liked. [wa] mida+ta 
(4) [a] sammannitabbo-should acknowledge well. iti * sammato- 
well-acknowledged, well-recognized. 
[b] sam sutthu-well. manitabbo püjetabbo-should honor. iti 
* sammato-well-honored. 
[c] sammaniyittha'ti [sammaniyittha+iti] sammaniryittha-well 
adored. iti ° sammato-well-adored. [wa] sarnVmana+ta 
(5) [a] samkapptyate-well thought. iti ® sankappito-well thought. 
[b] samkappiyittha'ti [sarhkappiyitthatiti] samkappiyittha- 
well thought. iti ® sankappito-well thought. 
[wa] sarnVkappatta 
Note: In ED (a), an Akhyata verb in Kamma sense is used. In (b), the 
past tense mode is employed. All similar EDs should thus be noted. 
(6) [a] sampadiyate-well provided. iti * sampadito-well provided. 
[b] sampadiryittha'ti [sampadiyittha+iti] ° sampadito-well 
provided. [wa] sarnVpadatta 
(7) [a] avadhariyate-is limited. iti ० avadharito-limited, restricted. 


789 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


[b] avadhariyittha’ ti [avadhariyittha+iti] ° avadharito-limited. 
[wa] avaVdhara+ta 
(8) bujjhitabbo fiatabbo-should know. iti ° buddho-something 
which should know. [wa] budha+ta 
Note: “ñātabbo” is synonymous kita-verb of “bujjhitabbo”’. 
(9) [a] ajjhayitabbo-should recite, or learn. iti * ito-something 
which should be recited or learnt. 
[b] etabbo gantabbo-should go. iti ® ito-somewhere which 
should be gone. [wa] 1+ta 
Note: Though of the same root, these two words have different 
meanings. In (9-a), the root means to study, to recite (ajjhayana’ 
ttha), In (9-b), it means to go, to move (gaty'attha). 
(10) viditabbo fiatabbo-should know. iti ® vidito-known, famous. 
[wa] vida+ta 
(11) takktyate-(is) thought out. iti ® takkito-thought. 
[wa] takka+ta 
(12) [a] pujtyate-(is) honored. iti ® püjito-honored. 
[b] püjryittha'ti [pūjīyittha+iti] püjtyittha-is honored. iti 
e püjito-honored. [wa] pūja+ta 
(13) apacayitabbo-should be respected. iti ० apacayito-respected. 
[wa] apaVcayatta 
(14) manitabbo püjetabbo-should be honored, or be adored. iti 
e manito-honored, adored. [wa] manatta 
(15) apactyate-(is) respected. iti * apacito-respected. 
[wa] apaVcitta 
(16) [a] vandiyate-is bowed. iti * vandito-bowed. 
[b] vandtyittha’ti [vandiyittha+iti] * vandito-had bowed. 
[wa] vandatta 
(17) [a] sakkarryate-(is) adored, is well treated with respect and de- 
votion. iti ० sakkarito-adored. 
[b] sakkartyittha’ti [sakkariyitthatiti] ° sakkarito-adored. 
[All are Kamma-sadhana EDs] 
[wa] sari Vkara--ta or sakkara-ta 


Note: Even though the affix is mentioned as “kta” in Sutta, it is 
shown as “ta” in WA so as to be in conformity with prevalent 


790 


Unadi Kappa 


usage in the canonical texts and the main grammatical principle 
of being “jinavacanayutta”. 


६४४, ६६१. वेपुसीदववमुकुदाभूह्वादीहि थुत्तिमणिमा निब्बत्ते 
644, 661. Vepu,si,dava,vamu,ku,da,bhi,hva’dthi 
thu,ttima,nima nibbatte. 
[Vepu, si, dava, vamu, ku, da, bhi, hu-adthit+athu, ttima, nima- 
nibbatte. 3 words] 
[V] Vepu,si,dava,vamu,ku,da,bhi,hu-icce’va’madihi dhatühi 
yathasambhavam athu,ttima,nima-paccaya honti nibbat- 
ta’tthe. 


The affixes “athu, ttima, nima” are applied after the roots 
“vepu, श्र, dava, vamu, ku, da, bhi, hu" and so on, in the 
sense of “caused by, or originated from". 

Note: There are two EDs for each example shown by numbers. The 
first is called minor-ED which precedes final major ED of example. It is 
not an example of Sutta but a related one, necessary to make the exam- 
ples much easier to understand. The WA of minor ED is shown for en- 
riching the grammatical knowledge and broadening the grammatical 
skill of the students. The second is major, complete ED of the word. 


(1) vepanam-shaking. vepo-tremor or involuntary motion of the 
body. [Bhavasadhana, Minor ED] [wa] vepu--na 
[2] tena-by that shaking. nibbatto-(it) arises. ® vepathu-ailment 
which occurs by shaking of body (like that of Parkinson's). 
[Major, final ED] [wa] vepu-athu 

(2) "Ilsayanarh-sleeping. sayo-sleep. [wa] si*na 
?Jtena nibbatto * sayathu-disease characterized by abnormal 
sleepiness. [wa] sitathu 

(3) "ldavanarh-heating. davo-the heat. [wa] dava*a 
Pkena nibbatto ° davathu-illness characterized by body heat 
(high temperature). [wa] davatathu 

(4) "lvamanam-vomitting. vamo-act of vomiting. [wa] vamu+a 
tena nibbatto * vamathu-disease marked by vomitting. 
[wa] vamu+athu 


79] 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


(5) UIkutti-creating. karanam-act. [wa] karatyu 
Ikena nibbattarh ° kuttimarn-something created artificially, 
not naturally. [wa] kara+ttima 

(6) "Idati-giving. danam-giving. [wa] da+yu 
lena nibbattam ® dattimarn-something received by giving. 
[wa] da+ttima 

(7) Ubhüti-arising. bhavanarh-arising. [wa] bhū+yu 
ltena nibbattarh ® bhottimam-something that occurs by 
arising. [wa] bhü-ttima 

(8) “lavahuti-sacrificing. avahanarh-sacrificing. 
[wa] ava-Vhu+yu 
Itena nibbattarh ° ohavimarh-things meant for sacrifice or left 
over after sacrifice. [wa] ava-Vhu+nima 


६४५, ६६२. अक्कोसे नम्हानि 

045, 662. Akkose namha’ni. [Akkose+namhi+ani. 3 words] 

[V] Akkosa-icce tasmim atthe namhi patisedhayutte 
ani-paccayo hoti dhatühi. 


To express reviling or cursing, an affix "ani" is applied af- 
ter the roots in the context of the negative particle “na” bar- 
ring the action. 


(1) na-not. gamitabbarh-should go. ° agamani-should not go. te- 
by you. jamma-bad guy! desarh-to the location, i.e. You should 
not be going there, bad guy! [wa] na-saddüpapada-gamu--àni 

(2) na kattabbarh-should not do. * akarani-should not do. te jam- 
ma kammarh-work. i.e. You should not be doing that deed, bad 
guy! [wa] na-saddüpapada-kara--ani 

Namhr’ti kimattharh? 

What is the word “namhi” for? 

To show that the examples shown below are inapplicable as 

there is no negative nipata “na” used in the context. Hence, 

no "ani" affix applied. 

(1) * vipatti-be ruined! te-for you. jamma-mean guy! i e. Be ruined 
to you mean (lowly) guy! [wa] vi-pada+ti 


792 


Unadi Kappa 


(2) * vikati-be broke! te jamma-mean guy! i.e. Be broke to you 
mean guy! [wa] vi-kara+ti 

Akkose'ti kimattharh? What is the word “akkose” for? 

To show that the example shown below is inapplicable as it 

doesn’t mean “‘akkosa-to revile”. Hence, no “ani” affix is 

applied. 

na gantabba-should not go. * agati-any partial act. te-by you. 

i.e. You should not go to any partial, biased action. 

[wa] agati=na-saddiipapada-gamu-+ti 

Note: The words with this “ani” affix used in this context are seldom 

found in the Tipitaka canonical texts. 


६४६, ४१९. एकादितो सकिस्स qud 

646, 419. Eka'dito sakissa kkhattum. 
[Eka-adito+sakissa+kkhatturh. 3 words] 

[V] Eka' dito sakissa kkhatturm hoti. 


The nipata particle “sakirh-times” applied after numerical 
nouns “eka” etc, changes into "kkhattum". 

Note: When expressing “one time", the “kkhatturh” affix denoting 
time and frequency, is suffixed after numerical words and (other words) 
like *eka-one" etc. It is an indeclinable affix without gender. It rather 
serves as an adverb of frequency or times in a sentence. 


(1) ekassa-of one. pada’ tthassa-the meaning of word. Sakirh-one 
time. Vararn-one turn. i.e. the meaning of one word for one-time as 
well as one-turn. ० ekakkhatturh-is called “ekakkhatturh” which 
means “once, one time”. [wa] eka*kkhattum (eka etc. is not the 
root, but numeral noun) 

(2) dvinnarh-of two. pada’ tthanarh-the meaning of words. sakim 
varam ® dvikkhatturh-twice, two times. [wa] dvitkkhatturn 

(3) tinnarh-of three. pada’ tthanarh sakim vararh ® tikkhattum- 
thrice, three times. [wa] titkkhatturh 
evam 

(4) * catukkhattum-four times. [wa] catu+kkhatturh 

(5) * paficakkhattuth-five times. [wa] paficatkkhatturn 

(6) * chakkhattum-six times. [wa] cha+kkhatturh 


793 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


(7) * sattakkhattum-seven times. [wa] satta--kkhattum 
(8) ° atthakkhatturh-eight times. [wa] attha--kkhattum 
(9) * navakkhatturh--nine times. [wa] nava+kkhatturh 
(10) * dasakkhatturh-ten times. [wa] dasa*kkhattum 





Icce' va! madayo sadda yojetabba. 
Such words should be applied. 


Note: According to prevalent view of the Pali grammarians, 
this morpheme, “kkhatturh” should be regarded as an in- 
declinable affix denoting frequency or times which does not 
have gender. The “kkhatturh-affixed word" usually plays 
the role of an adverb in the sentence. 


६४७, &&3. सुनस्सुनस्सोणवानुवानूनुनखुनाना 
647, 663. Sunassu’nasso’na vānu, vanü 
nu’nakhu’nana. 
[Sunassat+unassatona, vana, uvana, una, unakha, una, a, ana. 
3 words] 
[V] Suna-icce’tassa patipadikassa unassa ona,vana,uvana, 
üna,unakha,una,a,ana'desa honti. 


The “una” of the patipadika word “suna (dog)", changes 


into “oma”, *vana", *uvana", “una”, *unakha", “una”, 
५८८८८११ and *ana 

[This Sutta changes “una” of the word “suna” into “ona”, *vana", 

uvana’”, “una”, *unakha", “una”, “a” and “ana”. See examples] 


(1) samikassa-of owner. saddarh-voice. sunati'ti [sunati+iti] 
sunati-listens, obeys. iti * 5000-02 animal which obeys the 
voice-command of the owner, the dog. 

[Kattu-sadhana, ona-function example] 
[wa] suna-si [No affix, but nominative singular “si”] 
(2) samikassa saddam sunati’ti ® svano-the dog. [vana-function] 
Evam 
e suvano-the dog [uvana-function] * süno [üna-function] 
* sunakho [unakha-function] * suno [una-function] 
० sa [a-function] ° sano-dog [ana-function] (All the same meaning). 


794 


Unadi Kappa 


६४८, ६६४. तरुणस्स सुसु च 
648, 664. Tarunassa susu Ca. [Tarunassa+susu+ca. 3 words] 
[V] Taruna-icce’tassa patipadikassa susu-adeso hoti. 


The patipadika word “taruna” changes into “susu”. 


* susu-youth. kalakeso-who has black hair. i.e. the black-haired 
youth. [wa] tarunatsi [No affix, but nominative singular “si”] 


Note: The word “taruna” is also a patipadika word, not a root, with a 
noun-vibhatti “si” applied after it. 


६४९, ६६५. युवस्सुवस्सुवुवानुनूना 
649, 665. Yuvassu’vassu’vu vanu’nuna. 
[Yuvassatuvassatuva, uvana, una, ina. 3 words] 
[V] Yuva-icc’etassa patipadikassa uvassa uva,uvana,una, 
una’desa honti. 
The component letters “uva” of patipadika word “yuva”, 
change into “uva”, “uvana”, “una” and “tina”. [This Sutta 


changes “uva” of the word “yuva” into “uva”, *uvana", “una”, and 


[m 


üna" 
° yuva, * yuvano, ° yuno, * yuno-youth. (all of the same mean- 
ing). [wa] yuvatsi [No affix, but nominative singular “si” 


Note: “yuva” is also a patipadika word, not a root, with a noun-vibhatti 


664599 


si” applied after it. That “si” later changes into ‘‘a” by Sutta 152. 


६५०, ६५१. काले वत्तमानातीते ण्वादयो 


650, 651. Kale vattamana' tite nva’dayo. 
[Kale+vattamana-atite+nu-adayo. 3 words] 
[V] Kale vattamana tthe ca atita’tthe ca nu,yu,ta-paccaya 
honti. 


The affixes “nu, yu, ta” are applied in the sense of present 
and past. 


(1) [1] akasi-did. [2] karot?’ti [karotititi] karoti-does. iti ® kāru- 


795 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


an artisan or carpenter who did, and is doing his craft or carpentry. 
[wa] kara+nu 

(2) [1] agacchi-gone. [2] gacchati’ti [gacchati+iti] gacchati-goes. 
iti. * vàyu-the wind which has gone blowing and goes blowing in 
both past and present. [wa] va+yu 

(3) [1] abhavi-it was. [2] bhavatt’ti [bhavati+iti] bhavati-it is. iti 
e bhütam-creature (big and small) which had been and which still 
is). [All are Kattu-sadhana] [wa] bhü--ta 


Note: In the EDs, there are two numbered verbs which signify a specif- 
ic tense of the past and present according to the structure of verbs. 


६५१, ६४७. भविस्सति गमादीहि णीघिणू 
651, 647. Bhavissati gama’dihi ni,ghin. 
[Bhavissati*gamu-adihi-*ni, ghin. 3 words] 
[V] Bhavissatikala tthe gamu,bhaja,su,tha-icc’eva’ma’dihi 
dhatühi ni,ghin-paccaya honti. 
In the sense of future, the affixes “ni, ghin” are applied af- 


a? 


ter the roots “gamu, bhaja, su, tha” etc. 


(1) ayatim-in the future. gamitum-to go. silam-(is the) habit. 
yassa-whose. SO-that person. hoti’ti * gami-one who will go 
habitually. [wa] gamu-ni 

(2) ayatim bhajitum-to share. silarh yassa, so hotr'ti ® bhaji- 
one who will share (the portions) habitually. [wa] bhajat+ghin 

(3) ayatim passavitum-to listen. silam yassa, so hotr'ti 
e passavi-one who will listen habitually. [wa] paVsu+ghin 

(4) ayatim patthayitum-to stand. silam yassa, so hott’ti 
e patthayi-one who will stand habitually. [All are Kattu-sadhana] 
[wa] paVtha-+ni 

Note: Compare the words like *evambhavi-will be thus” which are ex- 

pressive of future process [Nava sivathika-pabba Section, Maha Sati- 

patthana Sutta]. This Sutta enjoins to apply two affixes in the sense of 


future. Actually, the affix “गा” alone is sufficient to complete these 
words used in the context of future sense in this Sutta. The examples af- 


उ? 


fixed with “ghin-affix” are found to be very much the same like “गा”. 
As a matter of fact, it could be a redundant affix as it is very much simi- 


796 


Unadi Kappa 


lar to “pT? affix shown in Suttas 532 (Kita chapter), 636. To clarify this, 
there is an affix ‘fagor’ which seems strikingly similar to “ghin-affix” 


of this Sutta found in Krdanta affixes section, Sutta Numbers 3121, 
3122, 3123, 3124, 3125 of Siddhanta-Kaumudi Sanskrit Grammar, 
PP 129-131. Some of the examples shown in those Sutta are: Dami 
(दमी) -the one who is tamed, Pamadi-(qatet) the one who is mad or 
forgetful or negligent etc. 


६५२, ६४८. किरियायं ण्वुतवो 
652, 648. Kiriyayam nvu, tavo. 
[Kiriyayam-nvu, tuvo. 2 words] 
[V] Kiriyaya' matthe nvu,tu-icc'ete paccaya honti 
bhavissatikale. 


When expressing an impending action of future, the “nvu, 


tu" affixes are applied in the sense of future. (The affix is al- 


ready shown in Sutta 527 except distinctive sense of future tense ex- 
pression) 


(1) *karissan" ti [karissarh+iti] *karissam-I will do". iti-thinking 
thus. ० karako-would-be doer. vajati-goes. [wa] kara+nvu 
(2) "bhufijissan" ti [bhufijissam-iti] "bhufijissam-I will eat" iti 
* bhotta-would-be eater. vajati. [Kattu-sadhana] 
[wa] bhujat+tu 


६५३, ३०६. भाववाचिम्हि चतुत्थी 

653, 306. Bhavavacimhi catutthi. 
[Bhavavacimhi-catutthi. 2 words] 

[V] Bhavavacimhi catutthivibhatti hoti bhavissatikale. 


The catuttht vibhatti (dative case) is applied after nouns 
which signifies “bhava-action” in the sense of the future. 
(Each example word is shown by two EDs by means of a future and 
bhava action in its EDs. See two numbered verbs in each EDs) 


(1) [1] pacissate-will cook. [2] pacanam-cooking. và pako- 


cooking. [Here, a bhava-sadhana mini ED in the sense of future or 
bhava as shown in ED] 


e pakaya-in order to cook. vajati-(he) goes. [Here, dative case in 


797] 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


the sense of future or bhava is applied and changed into an “aya” 
by Sutta 109. This function “aya” itself signifies an infinitive] 
i.e. He goes with the intention to cook. 

[wa] paca-*na-sa (“sa” is dative-case singular) 

(2) [1] bhufijissate-will eat. [2] bhojanarh-eating. va bhogo- 
eating. [Here, a bhava-sadhana mini ED] ® bhogaya-in order to 
eat. vajati. [Here, dative case in the sense of future or bhava is ap- 
plied] i.e. He goes with the intention to eat. [wa] bhujat+na+sa 

(3) [1] naccissate-will dance. [2] naccanam-dancing. và naccam. 
[Here, a bhava-sadhana mini ED] * naccaya-in order to dance. va- 
jati. i.e. He goes with the intention to dance. 

[wa] natatnatsa 

Note: The dative case applied through injunction of this Sutta clearly 

defines the meaning of each word in dative case by showing as an 


infinitive. The result or purpose of such word is a possible intended 
action of the future which is about to take place. 


६५४, ६४९. कम्मनि णो 
654, 649. Kammani no. [Kammanitno. 2 words] 
[V] Kammani upapade na-paccayo hoti bhavissatikale. 


The “na” affix is applied in context of a near-by kamma 
word in the sense of future. 


(1) nagararh-city. karissati-will create. ® nagarakaro-the would- 
be city-planner. vajati-goes. i.e. “I will create the city", thinking 
thus, the would-be city-planner goes. 

[wa] nagara-saddipapada-kara+na 

(2) salim-barley. lavissati-will harvest. * salilavo-the would-be 
barley-harvester. vajati. [wa] sali-saddüpapada-lü--na 

(3) dhafifiarh-grain. vapissati-will sow. * dhafiiavapo-the would- 
be grain-planter. vajati. [wa] dhafifia-saddiipapada-vapatna 

(4) bhogarh-wealth. dadissati-will give. ० bhogadayo-the would- 
be wealth-sharer. vajati. [wa] bhoga-saddüpapada-da-na 

(5) sindhurh-the water of Sindhu river. pivissati-will drink. 

* sindhupayo-the would-be water-drinker. vajati. 
[wa] sindhu-saddipapada-pat+na 


798 


Unadi Kappa 


६५५, ६५०. सेसे स्संन्तुमानाना 
655, 650. Sese ssam,ntu,mana'" na. 
[Sese-ssam, ntu, mana, ana. 2 words] 
[V] Sesa-icce’tasmim atthe ssam,ntu,mana,ana-icce' te 
paccaya honti bhavissatikale kammü'papade. 


When expressing as yet unfinished action, the affixes 
"ssam, ntu, mana, āna” are applied in the sense of future 
tense in the context of a near-by Kamma-word. 


(1) kammarh-work. karissati-will do. kammarh-work. 
e karissam-while doing. [wa] kara+ssarh 

evam-similarly, 

(2) kammar ° karonto [wa] kara+ntu 

(3) kammari ® kurumano [wa] kara--màna 

(4) kammar ® karano-while doing. vajati-(he) goes. 
[wa] karat+ana 


(1) bhojanam-food. bhufijissati-will eat. bhojanam 
e bhufijissam- while eating. [wa] bhuja+ssarh 
evam 
(2) bhojanam ® bhufijanto. [wa] bhuja-ntu 
(3) bhojanam * bhufijamano. [wa] bhujat+mana 
(4) bhojanam ® bhufijano-while eating. vajati-(he) goes. 
[wa] bhuja+ana 


(1) khadanam-dessert. khadissati-will munch. khadanam 
e khadissam-while munching. [wa] khada+ssar 
evam 
(2) khadanam ° khadanto. [wa] khada+ntu 
(3) khadanam ° khadamano [wa] khadat+mana 
(4) khadanam ° khadano-while munching. vajati. 
[wa] khada-*àna 


(1) maggam-the road. carissati-will go. maggam ® carissam- 
while going. [wa] cara*ssam 


799 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


evam 

(2) maggam * caranto. [wa] cara*ntu 

(3) maggam ° caramano. [wa] cara+mana 
(4) maggam ® carano vajati. [wa] cara+ana 


(1) bhikkharn-food. bhikkhissati-will beg. bhikkham 

e bhikkhissam-while begging. [wa] bhikkha*ssam 
evam 
(2) bhikkham * bhikkhanto. [wa] bhikka+ntu 
(3) bhikkham ® bhikkhamano. [wa] bhikkha+mana 
(4) bhikkham * bhikkhano-while begging. vajati. 

[wa] bhikkha+ana 


Note: There are differing views regarding the affixes of Sutta. Accord- 
ing to the current version of Kaccayana text and its examples, there will 
be four affixes. 

(a) In the second opinion of Rüpasiddhi in Sutta 650, it is said "ssantu- 
iti eko'va paccayo datthabbo". [Trans] It should be regarded ssantu as 
one complete affix, not ssarh and ntu separately. 

But Rüpasiddhi accepted the affix “mana and ana" without any different 
opinion. 

(b) Tha-bye-kan Sayadaw, one of the most respectable Pali scholars of 
Burma, is of the opinion that the actual affixes applicable by this Sutta 
in all likelihood should be “ssantu, ssamana and ana” affixes. He has 
strong reasons for having this view based on his wide knowledge of the 
Sanskrit grammar texts. 

(c) In Moggalana Pali grammar, Khadikanda section, there is a Sutta 
“Te ssapubba'nagate, eo» 225992$00co»", with its two examples shown 
as “thassanto, thassamano". See the double “ss” in the affix-position 
carefully. 

(d) In Katantra Grammar, Krdanta chapter, the fourth section, there is a 
Sutta titled “शन्त्रानौ स्यसंहितौ शेषे च”, with the examples shown as 


“करिश्यन व्रजति, करिश्यमाणो व्रजति, Karissam vajati, Karissamano 
vajati". 

In light of these facts, the affixes applicable by this Sutta are more like- 
ly *ssantu, ssamana and ana". In this case, the examples will have to 
reflect the affixes such as “(a) Karissam, Karissanto, Karissamano, 
Karano, (b) Bufijissam, Bufijissanto, Buiijissamano, Bufijano” and so 
forth. 


800 


Unadi Kappa 


The words in these affixes are sometimes called "future participles" ac- 
cording to their contextual position in a sentence. Except in the case of 
ana-affixed example, it is a common pattern of language to have an “i” 
after the root and a double “ss” in the affix or verb-termination in such 
words of simple structure when denoting the future. 


ea 


The words in affix “ana” are frequently found in the Pali texts such as 
“sayano, anupadiyano, jigisano, esano" and so on. 


६५६, ६६६. छदादीहि तत्रण्‌ 

656, 666. Chada'dihi ta,tran. [Chada-adihi--ta, tran. 2 words] 

[V] Chda,citi,su,ni,vida,pada,tanu,yata,ada,mada,yuja,vatu, 
mida,ma,pu,kala,vara,ve,pu,gupa,da-icce’ va’ madihi 
dhatühi ta,tran-icce’te paccaya honti yathasambhavarn. 


The affixes “ta, tran” are accordingly applied after the 
roots “chada, citi, su, nī, vida, pada, tanu, yata, ada, ma- 
da, yuja, vatu, mida, ma, pu, kala, vara, ve, pu, gupa, 
da” etc. 

Note: The words affixed with “tran-affix” are seldom found in the Pali 
texts except the word “Cittrarh”. 


(1) atapam-the heat. chadetr' ti [chadeti+iti] chadeti-covers. iti 
* chattam, * chatram-the umbrella which covers the heat. [Kattu- 
sadhana] [wa] chada+ta [wa] chada+tran 
(2) [a] arammanarh-the object. cintet?’ ti [cinteti+iti] cinteti- 
awares. iti ® cittam, ® citram-the mind which is aware or 
thinks of the object. [Kattu-sadhana] 
[b] cintenti-aware. sampayuttadhamma-concomitant mental 
states. etena’ti [etenatiti] etena-by this mind. và * cittam, 
* citram-the mind by which all concurring mental states are 
aware of the objects. [Karana-sadhana] 
[wa] citit+ta [wa] citi+tran 
(3) [a] atthe-the meanings. abhissavetr ti [abhissaveti+iti] ab- 
hissaveti-causes to flow, presents. iti ® suttarh, ° sutram- 
Sutta or grammatical principle (aphorisms) which presents (ex- 
plains) the meanings. 
[b] atthe sucetT’ti [siicetiHiti] sticeti-exposes, clarifies. iti va 
* suttam, * sutram-Sutta (a discourse) or a grammatical 


801 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


principle which exposes the meaning. [Kattu-sadhana] 
[wa] sutta [wa] suttran 
(4) [a] satte-beings. net?’ ti [netititi] neti-leads or guides. iti 
* nettam, * netram-eye which guides beings. [Kattu-sadhana] 
[b] satte icchitatthanarh-to the intended place. nenti etena’ti 
[etenatiti] etena-by this eye. iti và * nettam, * netram-the 
eye by which living beings are guided to (reach) intended place. 
[Karana-sadhana] [wa] nita [wa] ni+tran 
(5) [a] pakarena-in various ways. vidati'ti [vidati+iti] vidati- 
knows. * pavittam, * pavitram-various knowledge. 
[wa] paVvidatta [wa] paVvidattran 
[b] vividhena-by various. akarena-manner. mangam papam- 
bad things. punati-cleanses. sodhett’ ti [sodheti+iti] sodheti- 
clears. ® pavittarh, ° pavitram (afer)-the pure, the sacred and 
the sinless. 
Note: According to this ED, the root of this word is not “vida”, but 
“pu-to cleanse” [wa] pu+ta [wa] pu--tran 
[c] sucibhavarh-to the state of purity. và papunatr'ti 
[papunati+iti] papunati-reaches. iti * pavittarh, * pavitram- 
the pure and sacred which reaches to the state of purity. [Kattu- 
sadhana] [wa] pawvida--ta [wa] pawvida--tran 
(6) [a] Padati-goes. papunati'ti papunati-reaches. ® patto, 
e patro-pedestrian. [Kattu-sadhana] [wa] pada+ta. 
[wa] pada+tran 
[b] ahara-foods. patanti-fall (when put in). ettha-here. 
bhajane'ti [bhajane+iti] bhajane-in the bowl. iti ® pattam, 
* patram-the bowl where foods fall. [Adhikarana-sadhana]. 
[wa] patat+ta [wa] pata+tran 
Note: According to this ED, the root is “pata-to fall, not pada”. 
[c] padati pavattati’ti [pavattati+iti] pavattati-(food) arises. 
va * pattam, * patram-bowl where food is. [Kattu-sadhana] 
[wa] pada+ta [wa] pada+tran 
(7) [a] tanoti-extends. vittharetr ti [vitthareti+iti] vitthareti- 
spreads. iti * tantam, * tantram-thread on the loom which ex- 
tends or spreads. [Kattu-sadhana] 


802 


Unadi Kappa 


[b] tanitabbarh vittharetabban'ti [vittharetabbarn-iti] 
vittharetabbam-should spread. iti và * tantam, ° tantram- 
thread on the loom which should be spread. [Kamma-sadhana] 
[wa] tanu+ta [wa] tanu-tran 

(8) [a] yatatT ti [yatati+iti] yatati-exerts effort. ® yattam, 
* yatram-effort. [Kattu-sadhana] 

[b] yatati-exerts. viriyam karoti-makes effort. etena’ ti 
[etenatiti] etena-by this mental energy. va ® yattam, 

* yatram-effort. [Karana-sadhana] 

[c] yatanam-attempting. và ® yattarh, ® yatrarh-effort. 
[Bhava-sadhana] [wa] yata+ta [wa] yatattran 

(9) sukha,dukkham adati bhakkhatr'ti * atta, ® atra-body. 
[Re Sutta 627] [Kattu-sadhana] [wa] adat+ta [wa] ada+tran 
(10) madatt’ ti [madati+iti] madati-inebriates. iti ° mattam, 
e matram-intoxicated. [Kattu-sadhana] [wa] mada+ta 
[wa] mada+tran 
(11) vatthum-things. yujjanti-are tied. etena’ti [etenatiti] etena- 
by this rope. * yottam, ® yotram-rope by which things are tied 
up. [Karana-sadhana] [wa] yujatta [wa] yuja+tran 
(12) vattati’ ti [vattati+iti] vattati-(It goes) rolling. iti * vattam, 
e vatram-a ball, or any spherical object which rolls. [Kattu- 
sadhana] [wa] vatu+ta [wa] vatu--tran 
(13) [a] midati-moistens. sineham-love. karotr ti [karoti+iti] ka- 
roti-does. i.e. It moistens (softens the mind) and creates love. 
iti * mittam. ० mitram-friendly relationship which moistens 
(softens) (i.e. goodwill). [Kattu-sadhana] 
[b] midati sinehati-loves. etaya'ti [etayatiti] etaya-by this 
spirit. iti ° metta, ° metra-metta by which one loves others, 
i.e. the spirit of love). [Karana-sadhana] 
[wa] mida+ta [wa] mida-tran 
(14) [a] pari samantato-from all around. sabba'karena-by all 
manner. minanti-measure. etaya’ti [etayatiti] etaya-by this 
measurement. iti * matta, ° matra-measuring yardstick or 


ruler by which all-around dimensions of things are measured. 
[Karana-sadhana] 


803 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


[b] mananath-act of measuring. va ° mattam, ° matram- 
measuring. [Wa] ma+ta [wa] ma+tran 

(15) attano-of oneself. kularh-family race. punati-cleanses. 
sodhetr'ti [sodhetititi] sodheti-clears. * putto, * putro-son, 
who cleanses and clears family lineage. [Kattu-sadhana] 
[wa] pu-ta [wa] pu+tran 

(16) kalitabbarh sankhyatabban’ti [Re Sutta 632] ° kalattam, 
e kalatram (m77 )-wife, whom one should count (as family). 


[Kamma-sadhana] [wa] kala+ta [wa] kala+tran 
(17) sam sutthu-well. vareti-prevents. etena’ti [etenatiti] etena- 
by this. iti * varattam, * varatram-leather-strap by which it 
prevents dress from slipping. [Karana-sadhana] 
[wa] vara-ta [wa] vara-tran 
(18) vepati kampatr'ti [kampati+iti] kampati-shakes. * vettarh, 
e vetram-rattan vine which is shaken by winds etc. 
[Kattu-sadhana] [wa] vepu-ta [wa] vepu--tran 
(19) gopitabbam-should be protected. rakkhitabban’ti [rakkhitab- 
barh+iti] rakkhitabbam-should be guarded. iti * guttam. 
* gutram, * gottam, * gotram-family race which should be 
protected. [Kamma-sadhana] [wa] gupat+ta [wa] gupa-tran 
(20) dati avakhandati-cuts. etena’ti [etena+iti] etena-by this sick- 
le. iti ® dattarh, ® datram-sickle by which grain-crops are cut 
(when harvesting). [Karana-sadhana] 
[wa] dā+ta [wa] da+tran 
icce'va'madi. 


६५७, ६६७. वदादीहि णित्तो गणे 
657, 667. Vada'dihi nitto gane. 
[Vada-adthi+nitto+gane. 3 words] 
[V] Vada,cara,vara-icce’va’ma’dihi dhatühi nitta-paccayo 
hoti gana’ tthe. 


The affix “nitta” is applied after the roots “vada, cara, va- 
ra” etc. in expressing collective grouping. [gana-group] 


(1) vaditanam-of musical instrument players. gano-group. 


804 


Unadi Kappa 


* vadittam- the group of instrument players, orchestra. 
[wa] vada+nitta 

Evam 

(2) * carittam-group of ethical precepts or rules, moral codes. 
[wa] carat+nitta 

(3) * varittam-group of legal injunctions, legal codes. 
[wa] vara-*nitta 

icce'va'madi. 


६५८, ६६८. मिदादीहि त्तितियो 

658, 668. Mida'dihi tti,tiyo. [Mida-adihi+tti, tiyo. 2 words] 

[V] Mida,pada,ranja,tanu,dha-icce' va' madihi dhatuhi 
tti,ti-icce'te paccaya honti. 





The affixes “tti, ti" are applied after the roots “mida, pada, 


35 


ranja, tanu, dha” etc. 


(1) midati sinehatt’ti [Re Sutta 656] * metti-love. [Kattu-sadhana] 

[wa] mida+tti 

(2) padati gacchatr'ti [gacchati+iti] gacchati-goes. ° patti- 
pedestrian, infantry soldier etc. which goes on foot. [Kattu-sadhana] 

[wa] pada+tti 

(3) ranjati-craves. ettha’ti [ettha+iti] ettha-at this night time. iti 

* ratti-The night when craving arises in beings. [Adhikarana- 

sadhana] 

[wa] ranja+tti 

(4) [a] tanoti vittharetr'ti [vitthareti+iti] [Re Sutta 656] ° tanti- 
lineage. 

[b] attano-of oneself. kularh-family. tanoti-extends. 
vittharetr'ti và * tanti-lineage which extends one's family 
line. [Both Kattu-sadhana] [wa] tanu+ti 

(5) [a] paresam-of others. itthinam-women. puttarh-child. 
dharetr' ti [dhareti+iti] dhareti-carries. iti * dhati-foster- 
mother who carries to raise other woman’s child. 

[b] khiram-milk. dharetr'ti va * dhati-foster-mother who car- 
ries (i.e. suckles) milk (for other's child). 

[c] attano-of itself. sabhavarh-nursing nature. dharetr'ti va 


805 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


* dhati-foster-mother who carries one's nursing nature. 
[All three Kattu-sadhana] [wa] dha+ti 
icc'eva'madi. 


६५९, ६६९. उसुरन्जदंसानं दंसस्स दहो ढठा च 
659, 669. Usu,ranja,damsanam damsassa daddho 
dha,tha ca. 
[Usu, ranja, darnsanarn+darhsassat+daddho+dha, tha+ca. 
5 words] 
[V] Usu,ranja,daisa-icce'tesam dhatünam damsassa 
daddha'deso hoti. dha,tha-paccaya ca honti. 





The affixes “dha, tha" are applied after the roots “usu, 
ranja, dainsa". Besides, the word “darhsa” changes into 
"daddha". [Two functions] 


(1) ustyate-heating * uddho-heat or heated. [Bhava-sadhana] 
[wa] usu+dha 

(2) ranjanti-clings (as with desire). ettha’ti [etthatiti] ettha-here in 
this land. ® rattharh-the country or kingdom (where kings or rulers 
cling to as with fervent attachment to maintain authority & control). 
[Adhikarana-sadhana] [wa] ranjat+tha 

(3) damsiyate'ti [darhsiyate+iti] damsiyate-(is) bitten. iti 
* daddho-bitten (as by the snake etc.). [Kamma-sadhana] 
[wa] damsatkvi 


६६०, ६७०. सूवुसान मूवुसान मतो थो च 
660, 670. Sü,vu,sana' mü,vu'sana'mato, tho ca. 
[Sü, vu, asanam-ü, u, asanarn+atot+tho+ca. 5 words] 
[V] Sü,vu,asa-icce'tesam dhatünam ü,u,asanam ata’deso hoti, 
thapaccayo ca. 


The “i, u, asa" of the roots “sii, vu, asa" changes into 
“ata”. Besides, the affix “tha” is also applied. [Two functions] 


806 


Unadi Kappa 


(1) savati himsati-hurts. etena’ti [etena+iti] etena-by this weapon. 
० sattharh-weapon by which one is hurt. [Karana-sadhana] 
[wa] su+tha 

(2) hiro'ttappam-the modesty. sarhvarati-protects. etena'ti. 
etena-by this dress. ® vattharh-cloth by means of which one’s 
modesty is protected. [Karana-sadhana] [wa] vu+tha 

(3) sadda"nurüpam-in accordance with the word. asati bhavatr'ti 
bhavati-it is. iti * attho-the meaning (which happens or which 
has to be interpreted in accordance with the structural pattern of 
the original word). [Kattu-sadhana] [wa] asa+tha 


६६१, ६७१. रन्जुदादीहि धदिद्दकिरा क्वचि जदलोपो च 

661, 671. Ranju'da'dihi dha,di’dda,kira kvaci ja, 
da,lopo ca. 
[Ranja, uda-adthitdha, da, idda, ka, ira+kvacitja, da, lopo+ca. 
5 words] 

[V] Ranja,uda,idi,cadi,madi,khuda,chidi,rudi,dala,susa, 
suca,vaca,vaja-icce' va' madihi dhatiihi dha,da,idda,ka, 
ira-icce'te paccaya honti, kvaci ja,da,lopo ca. 

Puna nippajjante. 


The affixes “dha, da, idda, ka, ira” are applied after the 
roots “ranja, uda, idi, cadi, madi, khuda, chidi, rudi, da- 
la, susa, suca, vaca, vaja” etc. At some instances of words, 
the component words “ja, da" of some roots are elided. 
[Two Functions] 
Note:(1) After the root ranja, dha-affix is applied. 
(2) After uda, idi, cadi, madi, khuda, chidi, rudi, da-affix 
(3) After dala, idda-affix. 
(4) After susa, suca, vaca, ka-affix. 
(5) After vaja, ira-affix is applied. 
(1) [a] rafijitabban'ti [rafjjitabbanrh+iti] ratijitabbam-to get 
colored or get stuck to. iti ® randharh-hole. 
[b] ranjayittha’ti [ranjayittha+iti] ranjayittha-painted, stuck. 
iti va ® randham-hole. [Both Kamma-sadhana. 
In this example, the component consonant “j” is elided] 
[wa] ranjat+dha 


807 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


Note: The word “randha” has various meanings: (a) an opening of a 
hole (b) A fault, shortcoming (as a figurative expression) (c) the 
cooked food. 
[Reference texts] (a-b) Randham na passanti (Theragatha Pali, 
Mahakappinathera Gatha verse No.547) 
(c) Randham raja alonakam (Mügapakkha Jataka, 
Jataka Pali, Verse No.85) 


(2) attani-in oneself. sannissitanath-to those dependent on. mac- 
chamakaranam-fish, shark and sea animals. pIti,somanassam- 
joy and happiness. undati-increases. pasavati-multplies. ja- 
netT ti [janeti+iti] janeti-causes. iti * samuddo-ocean which 
causes joy and happiness to all sea-creatures which are dependent 
on it. [Kattu-sadhana] [wa] sarnVuda+da 

(3) [a] indati parami’ssariyarh-highest authority. karoti’ti [ka- 

roti+iti] karoti-makes. * indo-the celestial king named “Indra” 

who makes (i.e. asserts) the highest authority on his underlings. 
[b] indattarh adhipatibhavarh-the lordship. karotr'ti va 

* indo-the celestial king named “Indra” who makes the lordship 

on other celestial beings. [Both Kattu-sadhana] [wa] idi+da 

(4) canditabbo icchitabbo’ti [icchitabbotiti] icchitabbo-should 
be wished. iti * cando-moon wished (by beings to bring light at 
the night time). [Kamma-sadhana] [wa] cadit+da 

(5) [a] mandati hasetr'ti [haseti+iti] haseti-should be amused. iti 

* mando-the young one which should be amused or keep en- 
tertained. [Kattu-sadhana] 

[b] maditabbo hasetabbo’ti [hasetabbo-iti] hasetabbo-should 
be amused. iti và * mando-the young one. [Kamma-sadhana] 
[wa] madi--da 

(6) khudati pipaseti'ti [pipaseti+iti] pipaseti-causes thirst. iti 
* khuddo-thirst, thirsty. [Kattu-sadhana] [wa] khuda+da 

(7) chinditabbo'ti [chinditabbo+iti] chinditabbo-should cut. iti 
* chiddo-the hole which should be cut. [Kamma-sadhana] 

[wa] chidit+da 

(8) rudati hirhsati’ti [hirnsati-iti] himsati-hurts. iti ® ruddo-rude 

person who hurts (others). [Kattu-sadhana] [wa] rudi--da 


808 


Unadi Kappa 


(9) dalati duggatabhavarh-to the state of being poor. gacchatr' ti 
[gacchatit+iti] gacchati-gets. ० daliddo-destitute person who 
reaches to the state of being poor. [Kattu-sadhana] 

[wa] dalatidda 

(10) sussatt’ ti [sussati+iti] sussati-(it) dries. iti * sukkarh-any 
dried thing or dry (adj). [Kattu-sadhana] [wa] susat+ka 

(11) sucati’ti [sucati+iti] sucati-worries. iti * soko-sadness, worry. 
[Kattu-sadhana] [wa] sucatka 

(12) vacitabban’ti [vacitabbarn+iti] vacitabbarh-should utter. iti 
e vakkarh-speech which should be uttered. [Kamma-sadhana] 
[wa] vacatka 

(13) appatihato-unobstructed. hutva-being. vajati-goes. gac- 
chatr'ti [gacchati+iti] gacchati-goes. * vajirarh-thunder-bolt, 
which goes being unobstructed. It also means “diamond”. [Kattu- 
sadhana] [wa] vajatira 

icc'eva'madi. 


६६२, ६७२. पटितो हिस्स हेरणूहीरणू 
662, 672. Patito hissa heran,hiran. 


[Patito--hissa--heran, hiran. 3 words] 


[V] Pati-icce’tasma hissa dhatussa heran,hiran-adesa honti. 


The root word “hi” prefixed with “pati” changes into 
"heran", “hiran’. 


patipakkhe-the opponents. madditva-having crushed. gacchati 
pavattati’ ti [pavattati+iti] pavattati-happens. iti ° patiheram, 

e patihirarh-the act of miracle which happens (as if to dispel doubt of 
the opponent skeptics). [Kattu-sadhana] [wa] patiNhi+kvi 

[wa] pativhidkyi 


६६३, ६७३. कड्यादीहि को 

663, 673. Kadya’dihi ko. [Kadi-adihi-ko. 2 words] 

[V] Kadi,ghadi,vadi,karadi,madi,sadi,kuthi,bhadi,padi, 
dadi,radi,tadi,isidi,cadi,gadi,adi,ladi,medi,eradi,khadi- 


809 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


icce'va'madihi dhatühi ka-paccayo hoti. 
Saha paccayena ca nippajjante yathasambhavam. 


An affix “ka” is applied after the roots “kadi, ghadi, vadi, 
karadi, madi, sadi, kuthi, bhadi, padi, dadi, radi, tadi, 
isidi, cadi, gadi, adi, ladi, medi, eradi, khadi" etc. 

[This “ka” affix is elided later on] 

(1) kanditabbo chinditabbo’ ti [chinditabbo+iti] chinditabbo- 
should be cut. iti * kando-section, chapter which should keep cut 
and separated. [Kamma-sadhana] [wa] kadit+ka 

(2) ghanditabbo ghatetabbo’ ti [ghatetabbo-iti] ghatetabbo- 
should be struck. iti * ghando-bell. [Kamma-sadhana] 

[wa] ghadi+ka 

(3) vandanti-gather. ettha’ti [ettha+iti] ettha-here. ० vando-stem 
where all fruits and flowers gather (to grow). [Adhikarana-sadhana] 
[wa] vaditka 

(4) karanditabbo bhajetabbo’ ti [bhajetabbo+iti] bhajetabbo- 
should be put in portions. iti * karando-small cups and mini food- 
containers. [Kamma-sadhana] [wa] karadit+ka 

(5) mandiyate vibhüsiyate-(is) adorned. etena’ti [etena-iti] 
etena-by this. ° mando-beauty products. [Karana-sadhana] 

[wa] madi--ka 

(6) sandanti gumbanti-gathers together. ettha’ ti [ettha+iti] ettha- 
here. iti * sando-group, multitude. [Adhikarana-sadhana] 
[wa] sadi+ka 

(7) angamangani-bodily parts. kunthati chindatr'ti [chindati-iti] 
chindati-cuts. iti * kuttharh-leprosy which cuts bodily parts. 
[Kattu-sadhana] [wa] kuthit+ka 

(8) bhanditabban'ti [bhanditabbarh+iti] bhanditabbarh-should ar- 
gue or fight for. iti e bhandam-possession for which people argue 
or fight. [Kamma-sadhana] [wa] bhadit+ka 

(9) pandati-goes. lingavekallabhavarh-to the state of having devi- 

ant gender (sexual nature). gacchati’ti [gacchati+iti] gacchati- 
goes or happens. iti * pandako-gay who goes to the state of hav- 
ing deviant gender (sexual nature). [Kattu-sadhana] [wa] padit+ka 


810 


Unadi Kappa 


(10) dandati-punishes (the offender). anam-the executive order. ka- 
roti-makes. etena’ti [etena-iti] etena-by this. iti ° dando- 
punishment or fine meted out (by authorities as a way of punishing 
and imposing law and order on the offenders & wrong-doers). 
[Karana-sadhana] [wa] dadi+ka 

(11) randati himsatr'ti [hirhsati+iti] himsati-hurts (himself and 
others). 11 * rando-drunkard, an alcoholic who hurts (himself and 
others). [Kattu-sadhana] [wa] raditka 

(12) visesena-specially. tandati caleti-shakens. paresam-other. 
vifiiunam-scholars. hadayam-heart. kampeti’ti [kampeti+iti] 
kampeti-shakens. iti ० vitando-opposite views which agitates the 
heart of scholars. [Kattu-sadhana] [wa] vi-Vtaditka 

(13) isindati-dominates. paresam-the opposing party. maddat? ti 
[maddati+iti] maddati-overwhelms. iti ® isindo-A king named 
“Isinda”. [Kattu-sadhana] [wa] isidi--ka 

(14) candati candikkabhavam-to the state of being cruel. karotr'ti 
[karotititi] karoti-creates. * cando-cruelty which by itself creates 
a state of being cruel. [Kattu-sadhana] [wa] cadit+ka 

(15) gandati sannicayati-(it) collects. samüham-collection. 
karoti-makes. ettha’ti [ettha+iti] ettha-in this side of the mouth. 
iti * gando-each lateral side of the mouth (where some people used 
to keep food for chewing while they eat). 

[Adhikarana-sadhana] [wa] gadit+ka 

(16) andiyati-laid. nibbatttyat? ti [nibbatttyati+iti] nibbattiyati- 
(is) caused. iti * ando-The egg laid and caused (produced) by hen. 
[Kamma-sadhana] [wa] adit+ka 

(17) landitabbo jigucchitabbo'ti [jigucchitabbo- iti] jigucchitab- 
bo-to be detested. iti * lando-feces, and animal droppings. [Kam- 
ma-sadhana] [wa] ladi+ka 

(18) mendati-goes. kutilabhavam-to the state of being crooked. 
gacchatr'ti [gacchati+iti] gacchati-goes. ° mendo-the goat 
which goes (moves) in a non-straight way. [This ED is a bit ambig- 
uous] [Kattu-sadhana] [wa] medi+ka 

(19) erandati-fights. rogam-disease. hirhsatt’ti [hirhsati+iti] 
himsati-fights. iti * erando-caster oil plant, also called jatropa 


811 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


[Ricinus Communis] which fights disease (as it contains some cura- 
tive, medicinal properties). [Kattu-sadhana] [wa] eradit+ka 

(20) khanditabbo chinditabbo'ti [chinditabbo+iti] chinditabbo- 
should be cut. iti ० khando-section or portion of jaggery (molas- 
ses). [Kamma-sadhana] [wa] khadit+ka 

icce'va'madi. 


६६४, ६७४. खादामगमानं खन्धन्धगन्धा 
664, 674. Khada’ma,gamanam khandha’ndha- 


gandha. 
[Khada, ama, gamanarmt+khandha, andha, gandha. 2 words] 
[V] Khada,ama,gamu-icce'tesam dhatünam khandha,andha, 
gandha desa honti, ka-paccayo ca hoti. 


The roots *khada, ama, gamu” change into “khandha, 
andha, gandha” respectively while an affix “ka” is also 
applied at the end of some words. [Two functions] 


(1) jati,Jara,marana" dihi-by birth, old-age and death etc. 
samsaradukkhehi-sufferings of Sarhsara. khaditabbo’ ti 
[khaditabbo+iti] khaditabbo-consumed. iti * khandho-body or 


aggregates which is consumed (devoured) by sufferings of Samsara 
such as birth, old-age and death etc. [Kamma-sadhana] 


[wa] khadatkvi 
(2) [a] amati anga' mangassa-of (certain) bodily part. 
rujjanabhavarh-to the state of being afflicted. gacchatr'ti 
[gacchatititi] gacchati-goes. iti * andho-blindness in which a 


certain bodily part called “eye” goes to the state of being afflicted 
and inapplicable. [Kattu-sadhana] 


[b] cakkhuna-by way of the eye. amati rujjati’ti [rujjati+iti] 
rujjati-is afflicted. iti và-another method of ED. ® andho- 
blindness by which the eye is afflicted by it. [Kattu-sadhana] 
[wa] amatkvi 

(3) tarh-to that. tarh-to that. thanarh-place, i.e. here and there. vatena- 
by means of wind. gacchatt’ti. gacchati-goes. iti ° gandho-smell 
or scent which travels to here and there by means of wind. [Kattu- 
sadhana] [wa] gamutkvi 


812 


Unadi Kappa 


Evami-in same manner, are the examples where “ka” affix is applied 
after the word. 

(1) ° khandhako-five aggregates, the body. [wa] khadat+ka 

(2) * andhako-blindness, the blind. [wa] amatka 

(3) * gandhako-the smell or scent. [wa] gamu+ka 


६६५, ६७५. पटादीह्यलं 

665, 675. P ata’dihya’lam. [Pata-adthitalarh. 2 words] 

[V] Pata,kala,kusa,kada,bhaganda,mekha,vakka,takka, pal- 
la,sadda,mila,bila,vida,cadi,pafica,va,vasa,paci, 
maca,musa,gotthu,puthu,bahu,manga,baha,kamba, 
samba,agga-icceva madihi dhatühi patipadikehi ca uttara- 
padesu ala-paccayo hoti. paccha puna nippajjante. 


An affix “ala” is applied after roots “pata, kala, kusa, 
kada, bhaganda, mekha, vakka, takka, palla, sadda, 
mila, bila, vida, cadi, pafica, và, vasa, paci, maca, musa, 
gotthu, puthu, bahu, manga, baha, kamba, samba, agga 
and also after some patipadika words. 


(1) pate-in being useful. alan’ti [alarh+iti] alarh-is fit or suitable. iti 
e patalarh-layer or slab which is fit to be used. [wa] patatala 
(2) kale-in being muddy. alan’ ti [alarh+iti] alarh-is fit or suitable. iti 
e kalalarn-mud. [wa] kalatala 
(3) [a] papake-the evil. akusale dhamme-unwholesome mental 
states. kusati chindatt’ti [chindati+iti] chindati-cuts. iti 
* kusalarh-merit or wholesome mental state which cuts evil and 
unwholesome mental states. [Kattu-sadhana] 

[b] kusabhüte-those vile things termed Kusa (कुश). yathasa- 
bhavadhamme-in the naturally bad things. alan’ti va. alarn- 
is able to remove. * kusalarh-able in removing naturally vile 
things called Kusa. 

[c] kuse uddissa-being specifically focused. dane-in giving 
alms. alan'ti va * kusalam-wholesome meritorious goodwill 
by which one can give alms. 


813 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


[d] kuse saficaye dhammasamudaye-group of unwholesome 
mental states. alan'ti va ® kusalam-the wholesome things 
which can overwhelm collective group of unwholesome mental 
states. [wa] kusa-ala 

(4) kadde madde-in being intoxicated. alan'ti ® kadalam-banana 

(Refers to bananas which are being fermented). [wa] kada+ala 

(5) [a] bhagande secane-in dripping of bodily fluid. alan’ti 
e bhagandalarh-fistula disease. 

[b] bhagande muttakartsaharane-in discharging of stool and 
urine. alan'ti và * bhagandalarh-Fistula which makes the 
discharge of bodily waste (1.6. feces) quite a problem. 

[wa] bhaganda-ala 
(6) mekhe kativicitte-in adorning the waist. alan'ti ° mekhalarh- 
belt which adorns the waist (in a practical sense), belt. 

[wa] mekha+ala 

(7) vakke rukkhatace-in being a tree-bark. alan’ti * vakkalarh- 
tree-bark, fibrous matter of the plant. [wa] vakka-ala 
(8) takke rukkhasilese-in being tree sap. alan'ti ® takkalarh-tree 
sap. [wa] takkatala 
(9) palle ninnatthane-in low sloping areas. alan'ti ® pallalarn- 
muddy clay. [wa] phallatala 
(10) sadde harite-in being green. alan’ti ० saddalam-greenery. 
[wa] saddatala 
(11) mule patitthane-in being established. alan’ti e mulalarh-the 
stem of lotus which makes it established. [wa] mulatala 
(12) bile nissaye-in being reliable (as a resource). alan'ti 
e bilalarh-sea-salt. [wa] bilatala 
(13) vide vijjamane-in being present. alan'ti vidalam-visible 
object. [wa] vidatala 
(14) cande-in hard and dirty works. alan'ti ® candalo-manual labor- 
er, or a person of lowest caste in ancient India. [wa] cadit+ala 
(15) paficannam-of the five. rajunarh-kings. alan'ti * paficalo- 
the region so-named which is so wide that it fits to be ruled by five 
separate kings. [wa] paficatala 
(16) và gatigandhanesu-in being mobile and binding. alan’ ti 
e valam-tail. [wa] vatala 


814 


Unadi Kappa 


(17) và padagamane-in being able to move on foot. alan'ti và 
e valo-wild animal. [wa] vā+ala 

Note: Example 16,17 are two different words with different “I”. 

(18) vase acchadane-in hiding, covering up one's faults. alan'ti 
* vasalo-a person of mean conduct and mentality who used to 
cover up one’s own faults. [wa] vasatala 

(19) pace vitthare-in amplifying things to be this and that. alan’ ti 
* pacalo-fickle person who used to make a fuss. [wa] pacitala 

(20) mace corakamme-in act of stealing. alan’ti ° macalo-thief. 
[wa] macatala 

(21) muse theyye-in stealing, muse panacage-in being fatal when 
struck with. va alan’ti ° musalo-pestle or a club. 
[wa] musatala 

(22) gotte varhse singalajatiyam-in being included in the species 
as a fox. alan’ti ® gotthulo-fox or hyena. [wa] gotthut+ala 

(23) puthumhi vitthare-in being broad. alan’ ti ® puthulo-broad, 
huge (adj). [wa] puthu+ala 

(24) [a] bahumhi-much. sankhyane-in counting. alan’ti 

* bahulo-many (adj). 
[b] bahumhi vuddhimhi-in being numerous. alan'ti và 
e bahulo-numerous, many (adj). [wa] bahu-ala 

(25) mangamhi gamane-in going auspicious. alan’ti 
e mangalam-blessing. [wa] mangatala 

(26) bahumhi vuddhimhi-in being grown. alan’ti ° bahalam- 
solidly grown, thick (adj). [wa] bahatala 

(27) kambamhi saficalane-in being portable, alan’ ti 
e kambalarh-carpet or woolen coat. [wa] kambatala 

(28) sambamhi mandane-in adorning and providing. alan’ ti 
e sambalam-provisions for the journey, viaticum (sia). 
[wa] samba-ala 

(29) agge gatikotille-in going roundabout. alan'ti ० aggalam- 
door-latch (अर्गलः). [wa] aggatala 

Icce'va' madayo afifie’pi sadda bhavanti. 
And other example words in similar affix too are applicable. 


815 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


६६६, ६७६. पुथस्स पुथुपथा मो वा 
666, 676. Puthassa puthu,patha' mo va. 
[Puthassa+puthu, pathac-amo-va. 4 words] 
[V] Putha-icce'tassa patipadikassa puthu,patha’desa honti. 
kvaci ama-paccayo hoti. 


The patipadika word “putha” changes into “puthu, patha”. 
In some words, an affix “ama” is applied. 


(1) puthu-vast. hutva-having being. jatan’ti [jatarh+iti] jatarh- 
occurred. iti ® puthavi-earth which occurred (as a vast expanse of 
the land mass). [wa] puthat+kvi 

(2) pathame-in the beginning. jato-happens. ® pathamo-the first. 
[wa] putha+ama 
० pathavi-earth. ® pathamo-first. và. [wa is the same as the first 
pair of example] 

(3) puthu-various. kilese-defilements. janet?’ ti [janeti-iti] Janeti- 
causes. iti ० puthujjano-an unenlightened commoner, worldling 
who still causes defilements (in his mind). [Kattu-sadhana] 

[wa] puthu-saddipapada-jana+kvi (putha is also possible word) 

(4) puthu hutva jatan’ti * pathavi, * pathavi-earth. (different in 
terms of tha & tha) va. [wa] puthu-*kvi 


६६७, ६७७. सस्वादीहि तुदवो 

667, 677. Sasva'dihi tu,davo. [Sasu-adthi+tu, duvo. 2 words] 

[V] Sasu,dada,ada,mada-icce’va’madihi dhatühi 
tu,du-icce'te paccaya honti. 


The affixes “tu, du" are applied after the roots “sasu, dada, 
ada, mada” etc. 


(1) afifie-other. satte-beings. sasati hirhsatt’ti [himsati-iti] 
himsati-hurts. iti ® sattu-enemy who harms others. 
[Kattu-sadhana] [wa] sasu--tu 

(2) dukkham-trouble. dadati'ti [dadati+iti] dadati-gives. iti 
* daddu-the itch which gives trouble. [Kattu-sadhana] 
[wa] dada+du 


816 


Unadi Kappa 


(3) [a] dukkhena-with pain. adati bhakkhati-eats. ettha’ti ettha- 
here. * addu-prison where one is consumed by pain. 
[Adhikarana-sadhana] 

[b] dukkharh-suffering. adati anubhavati-undergoes. jano- 
people. etena’ti. etena-by this. iti va ० addu-prison by 
which people undergo suffering. [Karana-sadhana] 

[c] dukkharh-of trouble. bhajanam adharam-as place of 
origin. bhavatr'ti. bhavati-is. va ® addu-prison which is 
like a place of the origin of troubles. [Kattu-sadhana] 

[wa] ada+du 
(4) [a] madati-inebriates. ummattarh-a state of being mad. 


karoti’ti. karoti-creates. iti * maddu-narcotics which can 
intoxicate or create a state of being crazy (to the user). 
[Kattu-sadhana] 


[b] madati maddabhavarh-a state of overwhelming. karotr'ti 


và * maddu-narcotics which overwhelms (the reasoning 
capacity and the sane mind of) the user. [Kattu-sadhana] 
[wa] mada+du 


६६८, ६७८. च्यादीहि ईवरो 


668, 678 Cya’dihi Ivaro. [Ci-adihitivaro. 2 words] 
[V] Ci pa,dha-icce'va'madihi dhatühi Ivara-paccayo hoti. 


a? 


An affix “Ivara” is applied after the roots “ci, pa, dha” etc. 


(1) cryati'ti [ciyati+iti] cTyati-(is) sewn or stitched. iti 
* civaram-the robe which is stitched by tailor. [Kamma-sadhana] 
[wa] ci*ivara 
(2) [a] pivatr'ti [pivati+iti] pivati-drinks. iti ® pivaro (पीवर) fat or 
corpulent person who becomes fat by drinking or eating much. 
[Kattu-sadhana] [wa] pa+ivara 
[b] patabbam rakkhitabban'ti [rakkhitabbarn-iti] 
rakkhitabbam-should be protected. iti va ® pivaram-the fat 
person whom should be protected from falling down etc. 
[Kamma-sadhana] [wa] pà-ivara 
(3) dhareti-carries. dharetva-having carried (fishing net). Jivitam- 
living. kappetr'ti [kappeti+iti] kappeti-makes. * dhivaro, 


817 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


e dhivararh-(ehar) fisher-man who carries fishing net, who makes 
a living having carried it. [Kattu-sadhana] [wa] dhā+īvara 


६६९, ६७९. मुनादीहि चि 

669, 679. Muna'dihi ci’. [Muna-adihit+ca+i. 3 words] 

[V] Muna, yata,agga,pata,kava,suca,ruca,mahala,bhaddala, 
mana-icce'va'madihi dhatühi, patipadikehi ca 
i-paccayo hoti. 


An affix “i” is applied after the roots “muna, yata, agga, 
pata, kava, suca, ruca, mahala, bhaddala, mana and also 
after some patipadika words. 


(1) attha’nattharh-what is beneficial and not beneficial. munati- 
knows. fieyyadhammath-things that should be known. 
lakkhana’ divasena-by understanding the characteristics etc. và- 
also. Janatr'ti [janati+iti] Janati-knows. iti * muni-sage who 
knows what is beneficial and not beneficial, the one who also knows 
things that should be known by understanding the characteristics 
etc. [Kattu-sadhana] [wa] muna+i 

(2) yatati-exerts. viriyam-effort. karoti’ti karoti-makes. ® yati-an 
ascetic who makes effort. [Kattu-sadhana] [wa] yatat+i 

(3) aggati kutilabhavarh-to the state of being twisted in motion. 
gacchatt’ti [gacchati*iti] gacchati-goes. ° aggi-fire which goes 
in zigzag course (such as the flames and smoke in its motion). 
[Kattu-sadhana] [wa] aggati 

(4) patati, settho-dominant. hutva-having. purato-at front. gac- 
chati'ti ® pati-husband who goes at the front by being dominant in 
the position (in the family & households in the ancient patriarchal 
societies). [Kattu-sadhana] [wa] patati 

(5) [a] kavyarh-poem and poetic expression. bandhat?’ ti 

[bandhati+iti] bandhati-composes. iti * kavi-the poet who 
composes poems or poetic expressions. [Kattu-sadhana] 

[b] kantarh-pleasant. manapavacanam-charming word. va- 
datr'ti. vadati-speaks. va-also, as other method of ED. 
* kavi-the wise who speaks charming words, eloquent 
speaker. [Kattu-sadhana] [wa] kava+i 


818 


Unadi Kappa 


(6) sucati-cleans. parisuddham-being pure. bhavatr'ti. bahavati- 
is. * suci-the pious who is clean and pure. [Kattu-sadhana] 
[wa] sucati 

(7) rucati-shines. dibbatr'ti. dibbati-shines. * ruci-the light which 
shines. [Kattu-sadhana] [wa] ruca+i 

(8) mahantam-great. vibhavam-wealth. bhogakkhandham-the 
collection of possession. latr'ti [lati+iti] lati-takes. iti ° Mahali-a 
person named *mahali? who takes great collection of wealth, rich. 
[Kattu-sadhana] [wa] mahala-patipadikadi 
(also) mahàa-saddüpapada--là--1 [maha-great-la-to take+i] 

Note: According to ED, the word “mahali” means the one who take 

great amount of wealth. However, it is only an explanation of the the 


a? 


word mahali dividing it into two components “maha” and “1a” from 

grammatical point. The actual condition of the person may not reflect 

ED as he may be a poor man or just a person of ordinary social status. 

(9) bhaddam-good. yasam-fame. latr'ti ° Bhaddali-a person 
named bhaddali who takes good fame. [Kattu-sadhana] 

[wa] Bhaddala-patipadika-1, (also) Bhadda-saddüpapada*la-i 
[badda-good-Ha-to take+i] 

(10) manam-the mind. tattha ratane-in that jewel. nayat?’ ti. na- 
yati-carries. ® mani-Ruby which carries the fantasy of people (as it 
is quite precious and glamorous to own and wear). 

[Kattu-sadhana] [wa] manat+i 


६७०, ६८०. विदादीह्यूरो 

070, 680. Vida’dihyu’ro. [Vida-adihit+tro. 2 words] 

[V] Vida,valla,masa,sida,du,ku,kapu,maya,udi,khajja,kura, 
icce'va'madihi dhatuhi, patipadikehi ca ürapaccayo hoti. 


An affix “ura” is applied after the roots “vida, valla, masa, 
sida, du, ku, kapu, maya, udi, khajja, kura" and also af- 
ter some patipadika words. 


(1) [a] viditurh-to get. alan’ti. alam-not easy, not able. [Re: Sutta 
665 on usage of this word “alarn”] iti. * vidüro-distant place. 
Another possible and applicable meaning: 
[a] viditum-to know. alan'ti. alam-is capable. iti. ® vidüro- 
the one who is capable of knowing, i.e. the wise person. 


819 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


[b] viduratthane-in a distant place. Jato-(is) born. ® vedüro-one 

who was born in a distant place. [wa] vidat+tra 

Note: The second ED is possibly a Taddhita ED which is irrelevant for 

WA. 

(2) [a] vallati vallabhavena-as cover. bhavatr'ti. bhavati- 
happens. iti ® vallüro-a leafy shelter, a bower which serves as a 
shelter. [Kattu-sadhana] 

[b] vallati afifíiamafifiam-one on one, mutually. bandhatr'ti. 
bandati-ties up, entangles. và * vallüro-a thicket. 
[Kattu-sadhana] [wa] vallatura 

Note: valla (वल्ल) is a covering of thickly grown vines or bushes 
serving as a canopy. Vallüro (act) is such a place. In some instanc- 
es, it also means dried meat. 

(3) amasitabbo'ti [amasitabbo+iti] amasitabbo-should rub. iti 

* masuro-pulses such as lentil. [Kamma-sadhana] 
[wa] masat+ira 

(4) [a] sindati singarabhavarh-to a state of being glamorous. gac- 
chat?’ ti ® sindüro-glamor. 

[b] sindati virocatr'ti. virocati-looks glamorous. và 

e sindüro-glamor. [Both are Kattu-sadhana] [wa] sida+ūra 

(5) gamitum-to travel. alarh-not suitable. ana'sannatta'ti 

[ana-àsannatta-iti] anasannatta-for reason of being not near. iti 

* düro-The distant, far away place which is not fit to travel as it is 

not near. [wa] du+tra 

(6) kuti, saddam-the cracking sound. karotr'ti. karoti-makes. 

* küro-dried cooked-rice, which makes a cracking sound (when 

roasted or fried). [Kattu-sadhana] [wa] ku--üra 

(7) [a] attano-of its own. gandhena-by smell. afifiarh-other. 
gandharh-scent. kapati hanati-rids. himsati’ti. himsati- 
overwhelms. * kappüro-camphor which overwhelms other 
smells. 

[b] kappati roga'panayane-in removing some ailments. samat- 


thetr'ti. samattheti-is able. và ® kappüro-camphor which 
can remove (cure) some ailments. [Both Kattu-sadhana] 
[wa] kapu--üra 


820 


Unadi Kappa 


(8) [a] mahiyarh-on the earth. ravati’ti. ravati-sounds, or sings. iti 
e mayuro-peacock which makes sound on earth. 
[b] mahiyam yati-goes. gacchati' ti. gacchati-goes. iti 
® mayuro-peacock which moves on earth. [Both Kattu- 
sadhana] [wa] maya-patipadikatura 
Note: This is a grammatical ED for this word. Actually, other creatures 
also move and make sounds while moving on the surface of earth. 


(9) parhsurh-the soil. undati pasavatt’ ti [pasavatititi] pasavati- 
increases (when burrowing). iti * undüro-rat or any rodent. 
[Kattu-sadhana] [wa] unda-pátipadika--üra 

(10) khajjitabbo khaditabbo'ti [khaditabbo+iti] khaditabbo- 
should be eaten (as a dessert snack). iti ० khajjüro-date (Phoenix 
Dactylifera). [Kamma-sadhana] [wa] khajja--üra 

(11) kurati akkosati'ti [akkosati+iti] akkosati-curses uttering abu- 
sive words, reviles. iti * kurüro-rude person. [Kattu-sadhana] 
[wa] kura+ūra 


६७१, ६८१. हनादीहि णुनुतवो 
671, 681. Hana’dihi nu,nu,tavo. 
[Hana-adthi+nu, nu, tavo. 2 words] 
[V] Hana,jana,bha,rikhanu,ama,ve,dhe,dha,si,ki,hi- 
icce'va'madihi dhatühi nu,nu,tu,icce’te paccaya honti. 


The affixes “nu, nu, tu" are applied after the roots “hana, 
jana, bha, ri, khanu, ama, ve, dhe, dha, si, ki, hi" etc. 


(1) bhojanam-food. hanati hirhsati-grinds and chews. etena’ti 
etena-by this bodily part. iti * hanu-jaw by which food is chewed. 
[Karana-sadhana] [wa] hanatnu ® hanu va-It is also found in 
ordinary “n” as “hanu”. 

(2 gamanarh-act of moving. janet? tI. Janeti-(it) causes. ® Janu- 

knee through which moving is caused. [Kattu-sadhana] 

[wa] janat+nu. 

Note: In some texts, the word “janu” is also found in ordinary “n” 
which is also applicable. 

(3) bhati-(it) shines. dibbatr' ti. dibbati-shines. ° bhanu-the sun 
which shines. [Kattu-sadhana] [Wa] bha-++nu 


821 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


(4) nivate-in the air-less (air-tight) place. riti-wafts. gacchatr' ti. 
gacchati-goes. * renu-dust which falls even in air-less place. 
[Kattu-sadhana] [wa] ri*nu 

(5) khanitabbo-should be dug. avadaritabbo’ ti [avadaritabbotiti] 
avadaritabbo-should be cut. iti * khanu-tree stump which 
should be dug out and cut. [Kamma-sadhana] [wa] khanu+nu 

(6) angamangassa-of bodily part. rujjanabhavarh-to the state of 
penetration. amati gacchati'ti. gacchati-goes. * anu-atomic 
particles which penetrates even into bodily parts. [Kattu-sadhana] 
[wa] amat+nu 

(7) [a] veti tantasantane-in the fibrous row of fibers. bhavati’ ti. 

bhavati-occurs. iti * venu-bamboo which has fibrous content. 
[Kattu-sadhana] 

[b] bahisare-in outer layer only. alan’ ti [alarn+iti] alam-fit to 
use. iti Và * venu-bamboo which is usable only in outer part 
(as it lacks core hard-wood). [wa] vet+nu 

(8) vaccham-calf. dheti payetr'ti [payeti+iti] payeti-suckles. iti 
* dhenu-cow which suckles her calf. [Kattu-sadhana] 

[wa] dhe+nu 

(9) [a] attharh-meaning. dhareti’ti [dhareti+iti] dhareti-carries. iti 

* dhatu-the root of verb which carries its meaning. 
[Kattu-sadhana] 

[b] gamana, pacana' dikam [gamana, pacanat+adikarh] gama- 
na, pacana, adikam-going, cooking and so on. kriyarh-the 
action. dharetT’ tī [dhareti+iti] dhareti-carries. iti va 
* dhatu-the root of verb which carries (explains) various actions 
such as going and cooking etc. [Kattu-sadhana] [wa] dha+tu 

(10) styati bandhiyatr'ti [bandhiyati+iti] bandhtyati-(is) tied up. 

iti ® setu-bridge which is to be tied up (by various materials such 
as nails and timber etc.). [Kamma-sadhana] [wa] sit+tu 

(11) uddharh-upward. gacchati-goes. pavattatr' ti [pavattati+iti] 

pavattati-happens. iti * ketu-banner, flag which flutters up 
through the winds. [Kattu-sadhana] [wa] ki+tu 

(12) attano-of itself. phalarh-result. hinoti-causes. pavattatr'ti 

[pavattati+iti] pavattati-happens. iti ® hetu-reason or cause 


822 


Unadi Kappa 
which gives rise to its result. [Kattu-sadhana] [wa] hit+tu 


६७२, ६८२. कुटादीहि ठो 

672, 682. Kuta’ dihi tho. [Kuta-adihi+tho. 2 words] 

[V] Kuta,kusa,kata-icce'va' madthi dhatühi, patipadikehi ca 
tha-paccayo hott. 


An affix “tha” is applied after the roots “kuta, kusa, kata” 
and patipadika words. 


(1) ahgamangarh-parts of body. kutati chindatt’ti. chindati- 
cuts. * kuttharn-leprosy which cuts some parts of the body such as 
fingers and toes and so on as it advances. [Kattu-sadhana] 

[wa] kuta+tha 

(2) dhafifiena-by grain. chadetabbo-should be covered. püretab- 
bo’ ti [piretabbo+iti] püretabbo-should be filled. iti 
* kottho-grain-storage or grain-silo which should be filled with 
grain. [Kamma-sadhana] [wa] kusa+tha 

(3) katitabbarh madditabban’ti [madditabbarn+iti] madditab- 
bam-should be split. iti * kattharh-wood which should be split 
(for any purpose such as timber or fire-wood). [Kamma-sadhana] 
[wa] katat+tha 


६७३, ६८३. मनुपूरसुणादीहि उस्सणुसिसा 
673, 683. Manu,püra,suna'dihi ussa,nusi'sa. 
[Manu, pūra, suna-adihitussa, nusa, isa. 2 words] 
[V] Manu,püra,suna,ku,su,ila,ala,maha,si,ki-icce'va' madihi 
dhatühi patipadikehi ca usa,nusa,isa,iccete paccaya honti. 
Puna nippajjante. 


The affixes “usa, nusa, isa" are applied after the roots 
“manu, pura, suna, ku, su, ila, ala, maha, si, ki" and also 
after some patipadika words. 

Note: In the Sutta, both “Manu, pūra, suna'dihi" and “Mana, pūra, 
suna'dihi" are two possible and applicable texts. If the word is taken as 


"manu", then it will be a patipadika which means someone named 
manu-an early ancestor of mankind so-named. If taken as mana", it is 


823 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


the root which means “to know, to understand”. The latter matches with 
all three EDs of the two example words “manusso, manusso” as all EDs 
use an Akhyata verb “manati” which comprises the root “mana”. In 
light of three EDs which uses the two verbs “manati” and its synony- 
mous verb "janati", it could be the root “mana-to know” in the word 
“manusso”. It also matches with the Sutta number 10, (मनेरूष्यः) the six 


pada, Unadi Vrtti text. 


(1) [a] kusala’kusale [Kusala*akusale] kusala’kusale 
dhamme-(both) wholesome and unwholesome things. 
manati-knows. jānātī ti [janati+iti] Janati-knows. iti 
* manusso, * manusso-a human being who knows both 
wholesome and unwholesome things (the knower of good and 
bad things). 

[b] karana' karanam [Karanatakaranam] karana" karanam- 
(both) reason and non-reason. manati Janati'ti và 
* manusso, * manuso-a human being who knows both reason 
and non-reason. i.e. the one who can distinguish between what 15 
reasonable and what is unreasonable. 

[c] attha’nattharh [atthatanattharh] attha"nattham-(both) 
things of benefit and non-benefit. manati janati'ti va 
* manusso, * manuso-a human being who knows both bene- 
ficial and non-beneficial things. [All three are Kattu-sadhana 
EDs] ° manusso [wa] manu or manatusa 
e manuso [wa] manu or manat+nusa 

(2) [a] matapitünam-of mother and father. hadayam-heart. 

püretr' ti [pireti+iti] püreti-fills (with joy). iti ® puriso-male- 
offspring or son who fills the heart of mother and father (with 
joy and pride). 

[b] attano-of oneself. manoratham-the mind's chariot, i.e. de- 
sire. püretr'ti và * puriso-male person who fulfils one's wish- 
es. [wa] puratisa 

[c] püretr'ti va * poso-man. [All Kattu-sadhana] 

[wa] pūra+isa 

(3) [a] sasurehi-by in-laws. sunitabba himsitabba'ti [hirnsit- 
abba-iti] hirhsitabba-is bothered. iti ® sunisa-daughter-in- 
law who is (sometimes) bothered or pestered by in-laws. 
[Kamma-sadhana] 


824 


Unadi Kappa 


[b] dvinnam-of two. jananam-people (wife's side and husband's 
side). kulasantanam-the family lineage. karott’ titi. karoti- 
creates to increase. va Iti. * sunisa-daughter-in-law who in- 
creases the family lineage of two persons (wife and husband). 
[Kattu-sadhana] [wa] sunatisa 

(4) kucchitabban'ti [kucchitabbam-iti] kucchitabbam-is to be de- 
tested. iti ® karisarh-feces which is detested. [Kamma-sadhana] 

[wa] ku+isa 

(5) [a] gabbharh-dark cloud cover. vimoceti'ti [vimoceti+iti] vi- 
moceti-releases (removes). iti ® suriso-Sun which removes 
dark clouds. [wa] sutisa 

[b] tama’ndhakaravidhamanena 
[tamat+andhakaravidhamanena=tama-darknesst+andhakara- 
invisibility-causing, vidhamanena-by removing] 
tama’ndhakaravidhamanena-by removing darkness which 
causes invisibility. sattanarh-of beings. bhayam-fear. surati 

himsatr'ti [hirhsati+iti] hirhsati-kills, or removes. iti 
e sürlyo-Sun which kills or removes fear of beings by 
removing darkness. [Both Kattu-sadhana] [wa] sut+isa 
(6) rogam-(certain) ailment. himsatr'ti. hirhsati-kills or cures. iti 
* SirISO-rain tree which can kill or cure some disease (by its medic- 
inal curative properties). [Kattu-sadhana] [wa] sutisa 
(7) [a] ilati kampatr'ti [kampati+iti] kampati-trembles. iti ® illi- 
SO-a person named “illiso” who trembles (a fickle person). 

[b] tanhaya-due to craving. dubbalo-weak. hutva-having being. 
ilati kampati'ti va ¢ illiso-a person named “illiso” who fick- 
les in the face of temptations due to craving, capricious. [Both 
Kattu-sadhana] [wa] ilatisa 

(8) papakarane-in doing unwholesome things. alati-is able. samat- 
theti’ ti. samattheti-is able. iti ° alaso-the idle person (lazy 
man) who is prone to do unwholesome things. [Kattu-sadhana] 

[wa] alatisa 

(9) mahitabbo ptjetabbo’ ti [pujetabbo+iti] püjetabbo-is honored. 
iti * mahiso-buffalo which is honored (in some tribal societies). 

[Kamma-sadhana] [wa] maha+isa 


825 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


Note: The word is also found spelled as *mahimso" in the majority of 


66899 


texts. It should be noted as an “th” is inserted in such case of word. 

(10) styati bandhiyatr'ti [bandhiyati+iti] bandhtyati-is tied up. iti 
* Sisam-Head which is tied up (by head-band etc). 
[Kamma-sadhana] [wa] sitisa 

(11) kitabbam hirhsitabban’ti [hirhsitabbarn+iti] hirhsitabbarh-is 
hurt. iti ® kisarh-emaciated person (who is hurt or is vulnerable 
by possible onset of infections or diseases etc.) [Kamma-sadhana] 
[wa] kitisa 

icce’va’madi-and so on. 


Iti kibbidhanakappe una’dikappo chattho kando. 
The Sixth Unadi Section of Kita ends. 


826 


Unadi Kappa 


Una'dikappo nitthito. 
Unadi Chapter ends. 
Kaccayanapakaranam ?"nitthitar. 
Kaccayana’s Pali Grammar ends. 


57 [n the earlier versions of the text such as those of M.E. Senart and 
Mahabodhi editions, there is following colophon: 
Yani sippàni lokasmim, Anum thülani vijjare, 
Tani sabbani sippani, Sayarh sijja bhavantu me. 
Here is translation of the verse: 
“Whatever branch of knowledge in the world, be it trivial or significant one, 
May all those knowledges be self-manifest to me”. 


827 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


Nigama-gathayo 


The Concluding Verses 
(These verses are not from the original text, but 
composed by the translator as a record for the posterity) 


Aho gambhiracittata, niruttafifiuno desana! 
yatha’nusittharh caranto, sukhapeti sukhesinam! 


Magadhikaya Sambuddho, niruttipadakovido 
saddhammarh sutthu desayi, papento amatam pajam. 


Tassa vyakaranasattham, Kaccayanena vihitam 
anuvya'hatam vi'yakatam, Englisa'nukülato. 


55Sajjana-nàmadheyena, Mrammajaccena bhikkhuna 
saddhammavuddhikamena, saddhapamukhacetasa. 


“Ayam gantho sukham detu, sadhujane mahitale 
sukhena niruttifianam, samvaddhento puna'ppunam 


Buddhapaàvacanasettham, fiapayam sampamodayarh” 


Pufifiena’nena katena, maha’ massam 0910 sayam 
balena’pi na samvase, na kare papajamminam. 


Attaparahitankaro, tikkhagambhirafianava 
Dhammakami dhammagaru, dhammafifiü ca susilava. 


Papabalehi ajeyo, bahünam sukhadayako 
attapanidhisampanno, panfiajtvi dukkha'ntagü. 


58 Sajjana (सज्जन) is a correctly spelt Pali name of the translator, an equal 
term for “Thitzana” which is spelled as per Myanmar phonetics. 


828 


Appendices 
Appendices 


SAMPLE MORPHOLOGY 

Note: Studying morphological procedure is an important part of 
grammar study in the ancient times. It helps students learn how 
a word is evolved till it becomes a complete word after a series 
of procedures as prescribed in relevant Suttas are being carried 
out. It is in fact an active process of grammatical dynamics pur- 
sued by ancient students which is both interesting and enriching. 
Studying the meaning of various Suttas and relevant exam- 
ples alone is not enough for a serious student as it may seem 
like quite a quiescent process. It has tremendous impact in the 
development of grammatical knowledge and in gaining the mas- 
tery of the language effectively in the process. A few samples of 
systematic morphological procedures are shown below. Keep in 
mind that there are different steps for each word according to 
their grouping as a noun, or compound noun, or a Taddhita- 
affixed noun, or an Akhyata verb, or Kita and Unadi-affixed 
words. [Morphological procedures for Sandhi are already shown 
in the Sandhi chapter.] 


Noun Words 
Steps of the procedures: 
(1) Set up the base according to its natural ending category of the vowel. 
(2) Apply the applicable vibhatti (case-ending) after it. 
(3) Perform necessary functions till it becomes a complete word. 


(a) Puriso-man. (Nominative Singular) [Re: Sutta 104] 

[1] Setup the base as Purisa [This is a crude noun-form] 

[2] Apply a nominative, singular “si” after it^ purisatsi 

[3] Change "si" into “o” by 104 > Purisat+o 

[4] Elide the last “0” of purisa and keep it as it is by 83 
> puris-o (It thus becomes a complete word) 


(b) Purisa-men (Nominative Plural) [Re: Sutta 107] 
[1] Setup the base as Purisa 


829 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


[2] Apply a nominative plural “yo” after it^ Purisat+yo 

[3] Change “yo” into “a” by 107 > Purisa*a 

[4] Elide the last “a” of Purisa and keep it as it is by 83 
> Puris+a (It becomes a complete word) 


Akhyata Verbs 

Steps of the procedures: 

(1) Set up the root as a base. 

(2) Declare the relevant meaning of the root and formally name it as a root by 
457. 

(3) Elide the last vowel of the root as necessary by 521. 

(4) First, apply applicable Vibhatti after the root and then apply an applicable 
affix between the root and vibhatti. 

(5) Perform any necessary morphological procedure till it becomes a com- 
plete verb. 


(a) Gacchati-(He) goes. [Re: Sutta 476] (An Akhyata verb, in present 
tense, third person singular “ti” termination) 

[1] Gamu-gatimhi-to go. 

[2] Elide the last vowel of the root “u” by 5212 gam 

[3] Apply a verb termination in present tense, third person sin- 
gular “ti” by 414 after the root > gam+ti 

[4] Then, apply an affix “a” in the sense of a Katta (active 
voice) right after the root by Sutta 445 > gam-a-ti 

[5] Change “m” of the root into “cch” by 476» ga+ech+a+ti 
(It becomes a complete word). 


(b) Gacchanti-(They) go. [Re: Sutta 410] (An Akhyata verb, in present 
tense, third person plural “anti” termination) 

[1] Gamu-gamane-to go. 

[2] Elide the last vowel of the root “u” by 5212 gam 

[3] Apply a verb termination in present tense, third person plu- 
ral “anti” by 414 after the root? gam-anti 

[4] Then, apply an affix “a” in the sense of a Katta (active 
voice) right after the root? gam+a+anti 

[5] Change “m” of the root into “cch” by 476 > ga+ech+a+anti 
(Remember, one “a” is still needed to be elided). 


830 


Appendices 
[6] Elide the affix “a” by 5102 gat+ech+anti (The completed word) 


Kita-affixed words 
Steps of the procedures: 
(1) Set up the root as a base. 
(2) Declare relevant meaning of the root and name it as a root. 
(3) Elide the last vowel of the root as necessary. 
(4) Apply applicable affix after the root. 
(5) Perform any necessary morphological procedure. 
(6) When all is done, formally recognize it as a noun. 
(7) Apply a noun vibhatti case-ending after it and do all necessary further 
morphological procedures as those prescribed in normal noun words. 


Note: There are two stage-procedures: 
(a) Step 1-5 are Kita-morphological procedures. 
(b) The remaining steps are noun procedures. 
The procedure for unadi-affixed words are similar to that of Kita- 
affixed words. 


(a) Cago-charitable giving, sharing [Re: Sutta 529] 

[1] Caja-cage-to share generously 

[2] Elide the last vowel of the root> caj 

[3] Apply a “na” affix after the root by 529» caj+na 

[4] recognize the n-containing affix as a Karita by 621 

[5] Then elide that *n" by 523» cajta 

[6] Then apply a *vuddhi" function on the first “a” of “caj” by 
483> caja (It becomes an “a” as a result of Vuddhi function) 

[7] Change “j” into “g” by 623» caga 

[8] Recognize this almost-finished word *caga" in transit as a 
noun by 601 

[9] Apply a noun-vibhatti in nominative singular “si” after it > 
cagatsi 

[10] Change “si” into “o> cāga+o. Next apply step 4 procedure 
as mentioned in Puriso. (It thus becomes a complete word “cāgo”.) 


(b) Buddho-The one who knows truth, who awakened. [Re Sutta 557] 


[1] Budha-/ane-to know, jagarane-to wake up. 
[2] Elide the last vowel of the root? Budh 


831 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


[3] 
[4] 


[5] 
[6] 


[7] 
[8] 


Apply a “ta” affix after the root by 557> Budh+ta 

Change the affix “ta” applied after dh-ending root into 
“dha” by 576> Budh+dha 

Then, change “dh” of the root into “d” by 611> Bud+dha 
Recognize this almost-finished word “Bud+dha” in transit 
as a noun by 601. 

Apply a noun-vibhatti in nominative singular “si” after it > 
Buddha+si 

Change “si” into “o”> Buddha-o. Next apply the step 4 
procedure as mentioned in Puriso (*Buddho" completed.) 


Unadi-affixed words 


(a) Samatho-that which calms the mind, Samatha meditation. [Re: Sutta 


[1] 
[2] 


[3] 
[4] 


[5] 
[6] 


628] 

Sama-upasame-to calm 

Apply a “tha” affix after the root by 628> Sama+tha (No 
need to elide the last vowel of the root) 

Recognize this word *Sama-tha" in transit as a noun by 
601. 

Apply a noun-vibhatti in nominative singular “si” after it > 
Samatha-si 

Change "si" into “o”> Samatha-o. 

Next apply the step 4 procedure as mentioned in Puriso. (It 
becomes a complete word *Samatho".) 


(b) Geharh-home [A neuter gender word in nominative singular, Re: Sut- 


[1] 
[2] 
[3] 
[4] 


[5] 


ta 629] 

Gaha-gahane-to take. 

Elide the last vowel of the root> gah 

Apply an “a” affix after the root by 527» Gahta 

Then apply the function of changing the near-by first vowel 
“a” of “Gah” into “e” by 629» Geha 

Recognize this half-finished word “Geha” in transit as a 
noun by 601. 


832 


Appendices 


[6] Apply a noun-vibhatti in nominative singular “si” after it > 
Gehatsi 

[7] Then, change "si" into “amh” by Sutta 219> Gehatam. 

[8] Next apply step 4 procedure as mentioned in Puriso. 
(It thus becomes a complete word *Geham") 


Compound Nouns 

Steps of the procedures: 

(1) Set up all component words in crude-forms as a base. 

(2) Apply a vibhatti after each base-word. 

(3) Perform any necessary morphological procedure as shown in nouns 
chapter till it becomes a complete ED with coherent and relevant mean- 
ing. 

(4) Then, declare the meaning of ED and name it as a compound noun. 

Also give a relevant specific name of compound. 

(5) Delete all the applied vibhatti and all morphological traces of change till it 

returns to its initial crude-stage of the base. 

(6) Then, recognize it as a noun and apply any necessary procedure as 
explained below until it becomes a complete word. 


Rajaputto-the king’s son, i.e. the prince. 

[1] Set up the two base words as “raja+Putta” 

[2] Then apply genitive singular “sa” after raja and nominative 
singular “si” after putta> raja-*sa, Putta-si. 

[3] (a) Change raja together with the applied vibhatti “sa” into 
"rafifio" by 135. (b) also change the nominative singular 
vibhatti “si” applied after putta into “o”>putta+o. Then 
elide the preceding “a” by 83> putto> rañño putto. 

[4] After this basic procedure is done, it becomes a complete 
viggaha sentence (ED) as “Rañño putto” which has a co- 
herent and relevant meaning as “the king’s son" [rafifio-of 
king, putto-son] 

[5] Then, as this ED sentence has coherent and relevant mean- 
ings to each other, it is declared and formally named as 
Chatthi-Tappurisa by Sutta 327. 

[6] Then, elide all vibhattis and its concomitants (noun-case- 
endings “sa” and “si” along with their traces of morphological proce- 


833 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


dure such as newly changed word-forms “rafifio putto”) by Sutta 317 
> rajaputta. In addition, keep it as it is by Sutta 318. 

[7] Then, this word “rajaputta” in transit is to be recognized as 
noun by means of Sutta 601. 

[8] Apply a nominative singular “si” after rajaputta 
> rajaputtatsi 

[9] Then, change “si” into “o” by Sutta 1042 Rajaputtato. 

[10] Apply elision procedure on the last “a” of the rajaputta by 
Sutta 83 (It becomes a complete word.) 


Noun in Taddhita-affix 

Steps of the procedures: 

(I) Setup the word and applicable additional words such as *apacca" etc. 
as a base according to specific category of Taddhita. 

(2) Apply a vibhatti after each base-word. 

(3) Perform any necessary morphological procedure as shown in the nouns 
chapter till it becomes a complete ED with coherent and relevant 
meaning. 

(4) Then, declare the meaning of ED and apply a relevant affix as neces- 
sary. 

(5) Wipe out the applied vibhatti and all morphological traces of change till 
it returns to its initial crude-stage of the base. 

(6) Then, recognize it as a noun and apply any necessary procedure as 
explained below until it becomes a complete word. 


Vasittho-Vasittha's son. 

[1] Setup the base as Vasitthat+apacca 

[2] Apply genitive singular “sa” after vasittha> Vasitthat+sa 
and add one more “s” to the front of “sa” by means of Sutta 
61 > vasitthassa 

[3] Apply a nominative singular “si” after apacca>apaccatsi. 
Besides, change that “si” into “am” by Sutta 219 > 
apaccatam. Then, elide the preceding “a” by means of 83> 
apaccam. Thus, it becomes a complete ED sentence as “Va- 
sitthassa apaccam" which has relevant meaning. 

[4] Vasitthassa-of someone named “vasittha”, apaccarh-son. When 
this meaning signifying patronymic is implied by this ED, 


834 


[5] 
[6] 
[7] 
[8] 


[9] 


Appendices 


an affix “na” is applied between two words by 344. It will 
then look like this? vasitthassa*na-*apaccam. 

Then, by means of the word “tesarh” in Sutta 317, all the 
applied vibhatti, traces of morphological procedures as well 
as the word “‘apacca” are to be deleted> vasittha+na. 

Elide the “n” of the affix by means of Sutta 3967 
vasitthata. 

Keep it as it is by Sutta 318. 

Then, by rule of Sutta 400, perform a vuddhi function on 
the front “a” at Vasittha> Vasittha+a. Then, elide the sec- 
ond “a” by Sutta 83. 

Recognize this word “vasittha” as a noun by Sutta 601 and 
apply a nominative “si” after it^ Vasittha-si 


[10] Then, change that applied "si" into “o” by Sutta 104 > 


Vasittha-o. 


[11] Apply elision procedure by Sutta 83 on the last vowel “a” 


of Vasittha> Vasitth+o (It thus becomes a complete word.) 


Note: Performing morphological procedures for Samasa 
and Taddhita words require a strong and thorough 
knowledge and understanding of Nama, Akhyata and Kita 
chapters. Thus, this branch of study of the structural mor- 
phology of Pali words can broaden and enrich the grammat- 
ical insight of the student in many ways and lead to a more 
profound in-depth mastery of the language. 


835 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 
KARAKA AND SADHANA 


Sadhana means that by which a specific word suffixed with a 
Kita or an unadi affix is completed or brought to completion. It 
refers to various kinds of Kita and Unadi affixes. Through appli- 
cation of them, words are brought to completion as perfect 
words. The completed words carry the specific subtle meanings 
such as those grammatically defined terms of Kattu, Kamma and 
so on. The grammatical concept of Sadhana is originally based 
on the nature of affix being applied after the root and its relevant 
EDs. There are certain Suttas, such as Bhavakammesu ta (556), 
Kattukaranapadesesu ca (548) and so on, which directly show a 
specific affix to be applied in a particular sense of Sadhana. Be- 
sides, the EDs of such words are also to be in concordant with 
relevant Sadhanas. For example, if the affix of the word is ap- 
plied in the sense of Kattu sadhana, then the ED of that word has 
to be a Kattu Sadhana ED. 


For the ease and convenience of students, the name of specific 
Sadhana of EDs are shown in both Kita and Unadi chapters. 
Though studying and understanding the Sadhanas and their gen- 
eral aspect and characteristics can help to develop a more thor- 
ough grammatical knowledge and skill, it is not essential for be- 
ginners. However, for the benefit of developing such a skill, all 
relevant information will be briefly explained. [Sadhiyate nipphadi- 
yate anena’ti sadhanam. sadha-nipphattivam-to complete+yu] 


The Role of Karaka & Sadhana 
Though Karaka and Sadhana share somewhat similar implica- 
tions, the role they can play in the grammar and actual sentence 
structure of the practical language application are quite different. 
(a) The six Karakas in individually assigned case-endings as per 
the relevant Suttas in the Karaka chapter, can definitely 
play their own specific roles such as the subject (for Kattu- 
karaka) or the object (for Kamma-karaka) and so forth. 


836 


Appendices 


(b) On other hand, most of the Sadhanas do not have this kind 


(1) 
Q) 
(3) 


of significant role. However, out of seven Sadhanas, Kat- 
tu, Kamma and Bhava, have some significant role in af- 
fecting the voice of a verb and the structure of a sen- 
tence. 

For example, a Kattu-affixed word may affect the voice of 
sentence to be an active voice. Kamma-affixed word and 
Bhava-affixed words will affect as passive voice and imper- 
sonal voices respectively. Shown below are some sample 
sentences structured with such words as examples. 


Example sentence of Kattu-Sadhana-affixed words. 

Note: The verbs with Kattu-sadhana affix are shown underlined. 
Danam Dinno devadatto [da+ta] (Sutta 626, Kaccayana text, 
Unadi chapter) Devadatta gave alms. (Active voice) 

Kumaro antepuram gato [gamu+ta] (Mahapadana Sutta, 
Mahavagga Pali) The prince went into the palace. (Active voice) 

So bhagava sayam’ pi cattari saccani Buddho [Budha-ta] 
(Ciila-Saccaka Sutta commentary, Mülapannasa Pali texts) That glori- 
ous Buddha knew four truths by himself too. (Active voice) 


Example sentence of Kamma-sadhana affixed words 
Note: The verbs with Kamma-sadhana affix are shown underlined. 


(1) Buddhena dhammo desito [disat+ta] The Dhamma is taught by 


Buddha. (Passive voice) 


(2) Bhotabbo odano bhavata [bhuja--tabba] (Sutta 625, Unadi chap- 


(1) 
(2) 


ter, Kaccayana text) The rice is to be eaten by your honorable. (Passive 
voice) 


Example sentence of Bhava-sadhana affixed word. 

Note: The verbs with Bhava-sadhana affix are shown underlined. 
Tassa Gitam [ge--ta] (Sutta 556, Kita chapter) Of that person (i.e. 
His) singing, His singing. 

Sayitabbam bhavata [sit+tabba] (Sutta 625, Unadi chapter) 
Eating by your honorable. (Impersonal voice) 


837 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


General Aspects of Sadhana. 

Keep in mind that the remaining four Sadhanas, namely 
Karana, Sampadana, Apadana and Adhikarana, do not have 
any significant role except that of an ordinary noun in a sen- 
tence. The meaning of words affixed in each of the seven 
Sadhanas have their own subtle meanings which are clearly and 
simply translated below. See an ordinary translation and then a 
bit detailed explanatory note shown in parenthesis which reflect 
their respective Sadhana and the ED in Pali. In order to under- 
stand a Sadhana and relevant ED of each Sadhana, a student 
needs to know the sense of affix and the general structural as- 
pect of each ED which are distinctive from each other. Please 
read notes carefully which explains general aspects of the EDs 
of each Sadhana. As a matter of fact, it requires a very firm 
foundation of thorough study and grammatical knowledge to 
understand all aspects of Sadhana and EDs. 


1. [Kattu] Nayako-the leader (who leads) (Sutta 527) 
[ED in Pali] Netr'ti Nayako. [neti+iti] 
Note: Here, Kattu-sadhana is signified by means of the Akhyata verb 
"peti" which in itself is an active-voice verb in Kattu-sense. Also note 
the word “iti” is included to indicate the reason (Vacana-hetu). 

2. [Kamma] Kammam-work (which is being done) (531) 
[ED in Pali] Karryate tan'ti Kammam. [kartyate tarh+it] 
Note: Here, Kamma-sadhana is signified by means of the Akhyata verb 
“Kartyate” which in itself is a passive voice verb with the affix “ya” in 
Kamma-sense. Also note the word “iti” is included to indicate the rea- 
son. 

3. [Bhāva] Cago-generosity (act of giving, sharing) (529) [ED 
in Pali] Cajate, Cajanam và Cago (và indicates another possible 
ED) 
Note: Here, Bhava-sadhana is signified by means of twin verbs of two 
applicable EDs, the first *Cajate" being an Akhyata verb in Bhava voice 
and the second Kita word *Cajanam" in Bhava affix “yu”. Here, the 
verbs which in themselves are expressive of Bhava-sense. Also note 
that there is no “iti” at all. This is the only Sadhana where there is no 
“iti” required in its ED. 











838 


Appendices 


[Karana] Vinayo-the discipline (by which one is trained) 
(527) [ED in Pali] Vineti etena'ti Vinayo. [etena+iti] 

Note: Here, Karana-sadhana is signified by means of a Sabbanama- 
noun word “eta” in instrumental case which by itself is a Karana. Also 
note the word “iti” is included to indicate the reason. 

[Sampadana] Daniyo-the recipient monk (to which alms 
should be given) [ED in Pali] Databbo Assa’ti Danryo. 
[assatiti] 

Note: Here, Sampadana-sadhana is signified by means of the Sabba- 
nama word “Ta” in dative case which by itself is a Sampadana. Also 
note the word “iti” is included to indicate the reason. 

[Apadana] Bhemo-the fearsome object (from which people 
fear) (627) [ED in Pali] Bhayanti etasma’ti Bhemo. 
[etasma+iti] 

Note: Here, Apadana-sadhana is signified by means of Sabbanama 
noun “eta” in ablative case which by itself is an Apadana. Also note the 
word “iti” is included to indicate the reason. 

[Adhikarana] Thanam-the place (where people stand) 
(548) [ED in Pali] Titthanti Tasmin'ti Thanam [tasmirh+iti] 
Note: Here, Adhikarana-sadhana is signified by means of Sabbanama 
noun “ta” in locative case which by itself is an Adhikarana also called 
Padesa or Okasa. Also note the word “iti” is included to indicate the 
reason. 


By taking a careful look at the above explanation, it is hoped 
that the students will clearly understand how Karaka and 
Sadhana play their inherent parts in the structure of Pali words 
and its sentences. 


839 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


THE LIST OF SIMILAR SUTTAS 
found in Panini & Kaccayana. 


Sanskrit Sutta (SS) and Kaccayana Sutta (KS) are shown here 
alongside in transliterated Romanized characters to show differ- 
ent or similar physical structure of each Sutta found in both 
grammatical texts. Numbers after Suttas indicate the book, chap- 
ter and serial sequence of each respectively. Being similar does 
not necessarily mean to be identical in terms of function and 
physical structure. Most Suttas, except a few, have only partial 
similarity and affinity in terms of the implied function, physical 
structure of wording and sentence make-up. The transliterated 
words of each Sutta will attest to the fact that Kaccayana's work 
can not be unilaterally averred as a complete copy of its cousin 
grammars, but a work borne out of shared linguistics which have 
deeply-rooted ancestry in the ancient Indo-Aryan civilization. 
There are 3925 or 3996 Suttas in Panini while Kaccayana 
comprises only 673 or 675 if two more Suttas from earlier ver- 
sions are included. The ratio and margin of similarity is not 
much substantial in relation to the amount of Suttas in the San- 
skrit texts as it was assumed by some scholars. Below is a list of 
Suttas which have some similarities, being prepared after careful 
research of the relevant texts. 


°° This number of Sutta is as practically found in the alphabetical index of 
Suttas in “Astadhyayi of Paninr', translated by Sumitra M. Katre. In Wikipe- 
dia online encyclopedia, it is found as 3996 Suttas which needs verification. 


840 


Appendices 


(1) तत्पुरुषः समानाधिकरणः कर्मधारयः (1-2-42) 


[SS] Tatpurusah samanadhikaranah karmadharayah 
[KS] Dvipade tulya’dhikarane kammadharayo 


(2) सरूपाणमेकशेष एकविभ्कतौ (1-2-64) 


(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


(6) 


(7) 


(8) 


(9) 


[SS] Sarüpanamekasesa ekavibhaktau 
[KS] Sarüpana'mekasesva'sakim 
भूवादयो धातवः (1-3-1) 

[SS] Bhüvadyo dhatavah 

[KS] Bhüvadayo dhatavo 

भावकर्मणोः (1-3-13) 

[SS] Bhavakarmanoh 

[KS] Attanopadani bhave ca kammani 
शेषात्‌ PAn परस्मैपदम्‌ (1-3-78) 

[SS] Sesat kratri prasamepadarh 

[KS] Kattari parassapadam 
सूस्त्रचा्यो नदी (1-4-3) 

[SS] Ustryakhyau nadi 

[KS] Nada’ dito va 1 

संयोगो गुरु (1-4-11) 

[SS] Samyoge guru 

[KS] Dumhi garu 

दीर्घञ्च (1-4-12) 

[SS] Dirghafica. 

[KS] Digho ca 

घ्रवमपाये5पादानम (1-4-24) 

[SS] Dhruvamapaye'padanam 

[KS] Yasma’dapeti, bhaya’madatte và ta' dapadanam 


(10) साधकतमं करणम (1-4-42) 


[SS] Sadhakatamam karanam 
[KS] Yena va kariyate tam karanam 


841 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


(11) आधारोऽधिकरणम (1-4-45) 
[SS] Adharo’dhikaranarh 
[KS] Yo’dharo ta' mokasam 
(12) कर्तुरीप्सिततम कर्म (1-4-49) 
[SS] Karturipsitatamam karma 
[KS] Yam karoti tam kammam 
(13) लः परस्मैपदम्‌ (1-4-99) 
[SS] Lah Parasmepadarh 
[KS] Atha pubbani vibhattinam cha parassapadani 
(14) तङानावात्मनेपदम्‌ (1-4-100) 
[SS] Tananavatmanepadam 
[KS] Paranya'ttanopadani 
(15) तिडस्त्रेणि त्रीणि प्रथम मध्यमोत्तमाः (1-4-101) 
[SS] Tinacatrini trini prathama, mdhyamottamah 
[KS] Dve dve pathama, majjimu’ttamapurisa 
(16) युष्मद्युपपदे समानाधिकरणे स्थानिन्यपि मध्यमः (1-4-105) 
[SS] Yusmadyüpapade samanadhikarane sthaninyapi 
madhyamah 
[KS] Tumhe Majjimo 
(17) श्रस्मद्युत्तमः (1-4-107) 
[SS] Asmadyutttamah 
[KS] Amhe Uttamo 
(18) शेषे प्रथमः (1-4-108) 
[SS] Sese prathamah 
[KS] Namamhi payujjamane'pi tulyadhikarane pathamo 
(19) संख्यापूवो द्विगु (2-1-52) 
[SS] Sankhyapuvo dvigu 
[KS] Sankhyapubbo digu 
(20) अनेकमन्यपदार्थे (2-2-24) 
[SS] Anekamanyapadartthe 
[KS] Afifiapada'tthesu bahubbthi 


842 


Appendices 


(21) चार्थे Gag: (2-2-29) 
[SS] Carthe dvandvah 
[KS] Namanarh samuccayo dvando 
(22) कर्मणि द्वितिया (2-3-2) 
[SS] Karmani dvitiya 
[KS] Kama’tthe dutiya 
(23) कालाघ्वनोरत्यन्त संयोगे (2-3-5) 
[SS] Kaladhvanoratyanta samyoge 
[KS] Kala’ ddhana' maccantasamyoge 
(24) कर्मप्रवचनीथययुकत्ते द्वितिया (2-3-8) 
[SS] Karmapravacaniyayukte dvitiya 
[KS] Kamma'ppavacaniyayutte 
(25) चतुर्थी संप्रदाने (2-3-13) 
[SS] Caturtthi sampradane 
[KS] Sampadane catutthi 
(26) येनङ्गविकारो (2-3-20) 
[SS] Yenangavikaro 
[KS] Yena’ngavikaro 
(27) अपादाने पञ्चमी (2-3-28) 
[SS] Apadane Paficami 
[KS] Apadane Pañcamī 
(28) यस्स च भावेन मावलक्षणम (2-3-37) 
[SS] Yasya ca bhavena bhavalaksanam 
[KS] Kalabhavesu ca 
(29) SET चानादरे (2-3-38) 
[SS] Sastht canadare 
[KS] Ana'dare ca 
(30) स्वामीश्वराधिपति दायाद साक्षिप्रतिमूप्रसुतैश्च(2-3-39) 
[SS] Svamisvaradhipati dayada saksi pratibhü prasutaisca 
[KS] Sami'ssaradhipatidayadasakhipatibhüpasuta kusalehi 
ca 


843 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


(31) सतश्च निर्द्धीरणम्‌ (2-3-41) 
[SS] Yatasca nirdharanam 
[KS] Niddharane ca 
(32) प्रसितोत्सुकाम्यं तृतिया (2-3-44) 
[SS] Prasitotsukabyam trtiya 
[KS] Manditu'ssukesu tatiya 
(33) संबोधने च (2-3-47) 
[SS] Sambodhane ca 
[KS] Alapane ca 
(34) द्विगुरेकवचनम्‌ (2-4-1) 
[SS] Dvigurekavacanam 
[KS] Dvigusse'kattam 
(35) स नपुंसकम्‌ (2-4-17) 
[SS] Sa napumsakam 
[KS] So napumsakalingo 
(36) aaa: (2-4-52) 
[SS] Asaterbhth 
[KS] Asabbadhatuke bhü 
(37) प्रतययः (3-1-1) 
[SS] Pratyayah 
[KS] Dhatulingehi para paccaya 
(38) गुपृतिज्‌किद्म्यः सन्‌ (3-1-5) 
[SS] Guptijakidbyah san 
[KS] Tija, gupa, kita, manehi kha, cha, sa va 
(39) उपमानादाचारे (3-1-10) 
[SS] Upamana dacare 
[KS] Aya namato kattü'pamana'dacare 
(40) Bate शप (3-1-68) 
[SS] Kartri sap 
[KS] Bhü'vadito a 


844 


Appendices 


(41) दिवादिभ्यः श्यन्‌ (3-1-69) 
[SS] Divadibhyah $yan 
[KS] Diva’dito yo 
(42) श्रुवः शु च (3-1-74) 
[SS] Sruvah sri ca 
[KS] Sva’dito nuna, unà ca. 
(43) रुधादिम्यः श्नम्‌ (3-1-78) 
[SS] Rudhadibhyah $nam 
[KS] Rudha'dito niggahitapubbafi'ca 
(44) तनादिकृञम्यः उः (3-1-79) 
[SS] Tanadi krifibhyah uh 
[KS] Tana’dito o, yira 
(45) कयादिभ्यः FAT (3-1-81) 
[SS] Kryadibhyah sna 
[KS] Ki’ yadito na 
(46) तव्यत्तव्यानीयरः (3-1-96) 
[SS] Tavyattavyantyarah 
[KS] Bhavakammesu tabba’ntya 
(47) नन्दिग्रहिपचादिम्यो ल्युणिन्यचः (3-1-134) 
[SS] Nandi, grahi, pacadibhyo lyuninyacah 
[KS] Nanda'dihi yu 
(48) कर्मण्यण्‌ (3-2-1) 
[SS] Karmanyan 
[KS] Dhatuya kamma' dimhi no 
(49) tg च (3-2-76) 
[SS] Kvip ca 
[KS] Kvi ca 
(50) परोक्षे लिट्‌ (3-2-115) 
[SS] Parokse lit 
[KS] Apaccakkhe prokha'tite 


845 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


(51) कुघमण्डार्थैम्यश्च (3-2-151) 
[SS] Krudhamandarthebhya $ca 
[KS] Sadda, kudha, cala, mandattha, ruca'dihi yu 
(52) मतिबुद्धिपूजार्थेभ्यश्च (3-2-188) 
[SS] Mati, buddhi, püjarthebya$ca 
[KS] Bhya'dihi mati, budhi, pujadthi ca kto 
(53) तुमुन्ण्वुलौ कियायं कियार्थायाम्‌ (3-3-10) 
[SS] Tumun nvulau kriyayam kriyarthayam 
[KS] Kriyayam nvutavo 
(54) भाववचनाश्र (3-3-11) 
[SS] Bhavavacanasca 
[KS] Bhavavacimhi catutthi 
(55) अण्‌ कर्मणि च (3-3-12) 
[SS] An karmani ca 
[KS] Kammani no 
(56) पदरुजविशस्पृशो घञ्‌ (3-3-16) 
[SS] Pada, ruja, visa, spr$o ghafi 
[KS] Visa, ruja, pada'dito na 
(57) भावे (3-3-18) 
[SS] Bhave 
[KS] Bhave ca 


Note: There is another Sutta (4-4-144) with identical structure like KS, 
but with rather different function. 


(58) स्त्रियां क्तिन्‌ (3-3-94) 
[SS] Striyam ktin 
[KS] Itthiya' matiyavo va 

(59) आकोशे नञ्यनिः (3-3-112) 
[SS] Akrose nafiyanih 
[KS] Akkose namha'ni 

(60) ईंषदुःसुषुकृच्छाकृच्छर्थेषु ल्‌ (3-3-126) 
[SS] Isadduhsusukrchrakrechrarthesu khal 
[KS] Isarh, du, sühi kha 


846 


Appendices 


(61) समानकर्तृकेषु तुमुन्‌ (3-3-158) 

[SS] Samanakartrkesu tumun 

[KS] Icchatthesu samanakattukesu tave,tum và 
(62) प्रेषातिसर्गप्राप्तकालेषु कृत्याश्च (3-3-163) 

[SS] Praisatisargapraptakalesu krtya sca 

[KS] Pesa'tisaggapattakalesu kicca 
(63) आवश्यकाघमएरययो शिंनीः (3-3-170) 

[SS] Avasyakadhamarnyayorninih 

[KS] Avassaka’dhaminesu ni ca 
(64) माङिलुङ्‌ (3-3-175) 

[SS] Mani lun 

[KS] Mayoge sabbakale ca 
(65) समानकर्तृकयोः पूर्वकाले (3-4-21) 

[SS] Samanakartrkayoh purvakale 

[KS] Pubbakale'kakattukanam tuna, tvana, tva va 
(66) कर्तरि कृत (3-4-67) 

[SS] Kartari krt 

[KS] Kattari Kita 
(67) तयोरेव कृत्यक्तखलर्थाः (3-4-70) 

[SS] Tayoreva krtya, kta, khalarathah 

[KS] Bhavakkamesu Kicca, kta, kkha'ttha 
(68) तिङशितसार्वधातुकम्‌ (3-4-113) 

[SS] Tinsita sarvadhatukam 

[KS] Hiyyattani, paficami, vattamana sabbadhatukam 
(69) तस्यापत्यम्‌ (4-1-92) 

[SS] Tasya patyam 

[KS] Va na’pacce 
(70) तेन Tet शगात्‌ (4-2-1) 

[SS] Tena Rattam ragat 

[KS] Na raga tass’eda’majfifatthesu ca 


847 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


(71) ग्रामजनबन्धुसहायोम्यस्तल्‌ (4-2-43) 
[SS] Grama, jana, bandhu, sahayobhyastal 
[KS] Gama, jana, bandhu, sahaya’dihi ta 
(72) द्वेरतियः (5-2-54) 
[SS] Dvestiyah 
[KS] Dvitihi tiyo 
(73) इदमो g: (5-3-11) 
[SS] Idamo hah 
[KS] Imasma ha, dhà ca 
(74) सर्वैकान्यकिंयत्तदः काले दा (5-3-15) 
[SS] Saravaikanyakimyattadah kale da 
[KS] Kir, sabbafifie’ka, ya, ku, hi da, dacanam 
(75) इदमो हिल्‌ (5-3-16) 
[SS] Idamo rhil 
[KS] Imasma rahi, dhuna, dani ca 
(76) प्रकाएवचने थाल्‌ (5-3-23) 
[SS] Prakarvacane thal 
[KS] Sabbanamehi pakaravacane tu tha 
(77-78) (a) इदमस्थमुः (5-3-24) 
(b) किमश्च (5-3-25) 
[SS] Idamsthamuh 
[SS] Kimasca 
[KS] Kimi'mehi tham 
(79) प्रश्‍यस्य श्रः (5-3-60) 
[SS] Prasasyasya $rah 
[KS] Pasatthassa so ca 
(80) वृद्धस्य च (5-3-62) 
[SS] Vrddhasya ca 
[KS] Vuddhassa jo iye’tthesu 
(81) अन्तिकबाढयो नैदसाघौ (5-3-63) 
[SS] Antikabadhayor nedasadhau 
[KS] Antikassa nedo 


848 


Appendices 


[KS] Balhassa sadho 
(82) युवाल्पयोः कनन्यतरस्याम्‌ (5-3-64) 
[SS] Yuvalpayoh kananyatarasyam 
[KS] Yuvanafi'ca 
[KS] Appassa kan 
(83) वीन्मतो लुक्‌ (5-3-65) 
[SS] Vinmatorluk 
[KS] Vantu,mantu,vinafi' ca lopo 
(84) तत्प्रकृतवचने मयट्‌ (5-4-21) 
[SS] Tatprakrtavacane myat 
[KS] Ta'ppakativacane mayo 
(85) धनुष श्र (5-4-132) 
[SS] Dhanusa $ca 
[KS] Dhanumha ca 
(86) पुर्वोम्यासः (6-1-4) 
[SS] Purvo bhyasah 
[KS] Pubbo’bbhaso 
(87) इको यणचि (6-1-77) 
[SS] Iko yanaci 
[KS] Ivanno yam nava 
(88) आटश्च (6-1-90) 
[SS] Atasca 
[KS] Attañ’ca (Only Sutta's wording is identical. Function 
is totally different). 
(89) स्त्रियाः पुंवद्धाषितपुंस्कादनूङ्‌ समानादिकरणे स्त्रियामपूरणी 
पियादीषु (6-3-34) 
[SS] striyah purhvadbhasitapursakadanun samanadhi- 
karane striyamapürni piyadisu 
[KS] Itthiyam bhasitapumitthi puma’va ce 
(90) पुंवत्क्मेघारयजातियदेशियेषु (6-3-42) 
[SS] Pumvat karmadharaya jatiyadesiyesu 
[KS] Kammadharayasajifie ca 


849 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


(91) इदंकिमोरीशकी (6-3-90) 
[SS] IdarnkimorisktT 
[KS] Iyatamakimetanamantassaro digham kvaci disassa 
gunam do ram sakhr' ca 

(92) कोः कत्तत्पुरुषेऽच्र (6-3-101) 
[SS] Koh kattatpuruse'ci 
[KS] Kad Kussa 

(93) ईषदर्थे (6-3-105) 

[SS] Isadarthe 
[KS] Ka’ ppatthesu ca 

(94) अत उत्सार्वधातुके (6-4-110) 
[SS] Ata utsarvadhatuke 
[KS] Karassa’ kāro ca 

(95) श्नसोरल्लोपः (6-4-111) 

[SS] Sna sorallopah 

[KS] Sabbattha'sassa'dilopo ca 
(96) युवोरनाकौ (7-1-1) 

[SS] Yuvo ranakau 

[KS] Ana’ka yu,nvinarh 
(97) अतोऽम्‌ (7-1-24) 

[SS] Ato’m 

[KS] Sim’ 

(98) समासे नञपूर्वे क्त्वो ल्यप्‌ (7-1-37) 
[SS] Samase'nafipürve ktvo lyap 
[KS] Sabbehi tuna'dinam yo 

(99) त्वाहौ सौ (7-2-94) 

[SS] Tvahau sau 
[KS] Tva'maham simmhi ca 

(100) तुभ्यमह्यौ ङसि (7-2-95) 
[SS] Tubhyamahyau hayi 
[KS] Tuyham mayhaii’ca 


850 


Appendices 


(101) तवममौ डसि (7-2-96) 
[SS] Tava mamau nasi 
[KS] Tava mama se 
(102) किमः कः (7-2-103) 
[SS] Kimah Kah 
[KS] Sesesu ca 
(103) dat: सः सावनन्त्ययोः (7-2-106) 
[SS] tadoh sah savanantyayoh 
[KS] Etatesam so 
(104) इदोऽय पुंसि (7-2-111) 
[SS] Ido'ya purhci 
[KS] Anapumsakassa' yam simmhi 
(105) अनाप्यकः (7-2-112) 
[SS] Anapyakah 
[KS] Anr' mi namhi ca 
(106) तद्धितेष्वचामादेः (7-2-117) 
[SS] Taddhitesvacamadeh 
[KS] Vuddha’disarassa va'samyogantassa sane ca 
(107) डषुगमियमां छः (7-3-77) 
[SS] Isugamiyamàm chah 
[KS] (a) Gamissa’nto cho và sabbasu 
(b) Isu, yamüna' manto cho và 
(108) पाघ्याध्मास्थाम्नादाणदृश्यर्त्तिसर्तिशदसदां पिबजिघ्लधमतिष्ठ 
मनथयच्छपश्यत्रच्च्छधघौशीयसीदाः (7-3-78) 
[SS] Pa, ghra, dhama, stha, mana, dan, drisi, aratti, sarti, sa- 
da, sadam piva, jighra, dhama, tistha, mana, yaccha, pasya, 
riccha, dhau, siya, sidah 
[KS] (a) Pa pivo (b) tha titho (c) Disassa passa, dissa, 
dakkha va (d) Sadassa sidattarh (4 Suttas) 
(109) ज्ञाजनो जौ (7-3-79) 
[SS] 114, janorja 
[KS] fiassa ja, jam, na 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


(110) बहुवचने झल्येत्‌ (7-3-103) 
[SS] Bahuvacane jhalayet 
[KS] Suhisva’ karo e 
(111) वचः उम्‌ (7-4-20) 
[SS] Vacah um 
[KS] Vacassa’jjattanimhi’makaro o 
(112) हस्वःघध (7-4-59) 
[SS] Hrasvah 
[KS] Rasso 
(113) कुहो श्रुः (7-4-62) 
[SS] Kuho scuh 
[KS] Kavaggassa cavaggo 
(114) युष्मदस्मदोः षष्ठी-चतुर्थी-द्वितीयास्थयोर्वात्रावौ (8-1-20) 
[SS] Yusmadasmadoh sasthi caturthi dvitiya 
sthayorvannavau 
[KS] Padato dutiya, catutthi, chatthisu vo, no 
(115) बहुवचनस्थ वस्नसौ (8-1-21) 
[SS] Bahuvacanasya vasanasau 
[KS] Bahuvacanesu vo, no 
(116) तेमयावेकवचनस्य (8-1-22) 
[SS] Temayavekavacanasya 
[KS] Te, me'kavacanesu ca 
(117) तवामौ द्वितियायाः (8-1-23) 
[SS] Tavamau dvitiyayah 
[KS] Tvarh mama' mhi 
(118) संयोगान्तस्थ लोपः (8-2-23) 
[SS] Samyogantasya lopah 
[KS] Vyafijano ca visa’ ññogo 
(119) मो नुस्वारः (8-3-23) 
[SS] Mo nusvarah 
[KS] Am vyafijane niggahitam 


852 


Appendices 


(120) मय उञो वो वा (8-3-33) 
[SS] Maya ufio vo và 
[KS] Va'mo'du'dantanam 

(121) एषाभ्यं नो णः समानपदे (8-4-1) 
[SS] Rasabhyarh no na: samanapade 
[KS] Ra,ha’dito na 


Total: 121 


853 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


The List of Similar Suttas 
found in Katantra & Kaccayana. 


There are about 1401 Suttas in Katantra grammar and 399 Suttas 
in Unadi Vritti. Those shown below are a list of Suttas from 
both texts which share some partial or total similarities in terms 
of function or structural wording although not all of them bear a 
complete resemblance. However, there are quite a few Suttas 
which are almost identical. 


सन्धि (Sandhi) 


(1) ते वर्गो पञ्च पञ्च पञ्च 
[SS] Te vargga pafica pafica pafica 
[KS] Vagga Paficapaficaso manta 
(2) अं इत्यनुस्वारः 
[SS] Am itya nusvarah 
[KS] Am iti niggahitam 
(3) व्यञ्जनमस्वरं परं वर्णं नयेत्‌ 
[SS] Vyafijana masvaram param varna nayet 
[KS] Naye param yutte 
(4-5) (a) अवर्णं इवर्ण ए [SS] Aavrna-ivarne e. 
(b) उवर्ण ओ [SS] Uvranne O. [2 Suttas] 
[KS] Kvaca'savannam lutte 
(6) इवर्णी समसवर्ण न च परो लोप्यः 
[SS] Ivarno yamasavarne na ca paro lopyah 
[KS] Ivanno yam nava 
(7) वमुवर्णः 
[SS] Vamu varnah 
[KS] Va'mo'du'dantanam 
(8) ए अय E aya 
(9) ओ अव O ava (These Suttas which are identical with Kaccayana Sut- 
tas, are found in Akhyata verbs chapter in the Kaccayana text) 


854 


(10) अनुपदिष्टश्च 

[SS] Anupadistafisca 

[KS] Anu'paditthaham vuttayogato 
(11) मोऽनुस्वारं व्यञ्जने 

[SS] Mo nusvaram vyafijane 

[KS] Am byafijane niggahitam 
(12) aif तदवर्गपञ्चमं वा 

[SS] Varge tadvargapaficamam va 

[KS] Vaggantam và vagge 


नाम (Nàma) 


(1) तस्मात्परा विमत्तयः 
[SS] Tasma tapra Vibhaktayah 
[KS] Tato ca vibhattiyo 
(2) आमन्त्रिते सिः संबुद्धि 
[SS] Amantrite si: sambuddhi 
[KS] Alapane si gasafifio 
(3) दृन्द्रस्थाच्च 
[SS] Dvandvasttha cca 
[KS] Dvandattha va 
(4) नायत्‌ सार्वनामिकम्‌ 
[SS] Nayat sarvanamikam 
[KS] Na’ fiam sabbanamikam 
(5) बहुव्रीहौ 
[SS] Bahuvrihau 
[KS] Bahubbihimhi ca 
(6) त्वमहम्‌ सौ सविमच्त्योः 
[SS]Tvamaham sau savibhaktayoh 


[KS] Tvamaham simhi ca 


855 


Appendices 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


(7) तुम्यम्‌ महाम्‌ ङथि 
[SS]Tubyam mayharh nayi 
[KS] Tuyham mayhafica 

(8) तव ममङसि 
[SS]Tavamama nasi 
[KS]Tava mama se 

(9) किम्‌ कः 
[SS]Kim kah 
[KS] Sesesu ca 


कारक (Karaka) 


(1) अव्ययीभावादकारन्ताद्विमक्तीनाम्‌ मपञ्चम्याः 
[SS] Avyayibhavadakarantad vibhaktina'm' mapaficamyah 
[KS] Am vibhattina' makaranta abyayibhava 

(2) अन्यस्माल्लुक्‌ 
[SS] Anyasmalluk 
[KS] Afifisma lopo ca 
Note: In Kaccayana grammar, these two Suttas are found in the Samasa 
chapter which is more relevant. 


(3) यतोऽपैति मयमादत्ते वा तदपादानम्‌ 

[SS] Yatopeti bhaya madatte va tadpadanarh 

[KS] Yasma'dapeti bhaya'madatte va ta'dapadanam 
(4) इप्सितं च रक्षार्थानाम्‌ 

[SS] Ipsitam ca rakharatthanam 

[KS] Rakkhanatthana’micchitarh 
(5) यस्मै दित्सा रोचते घारयते वा तत्‌ समप्रदानम्‌ 

[SS] Yasme 0159 rocate dharayate va tat sampradanam 

[KS] Yassa datukamo rocate, dharayate va. 

tam sampadanam 


856 


Appendices 


(6) य आधारस्तददिकरणम्‌ 
[SS] Ya adharastadikaranam 
[KS] Yo’dharo ta' mokasam 
(7) येन कियते तत्‌ करणम्‌ 
[SS] Yena kriyate tat kranarh 
[KS] Yena va kariyate. tar karanam. 
(8) यत्‌ कियते तत्‌ कर्म 
[SS] Yat kriyate tat krama 
[KS] Yam karoti. tam kammam 
(9) यः करोति स कर्ता 
[SS] Ya: kroti sa kratta 
[KS] Yo karoti. sa katta 
(10) कारयति यः स हेतुश्च 
[SS] Karyati yah sa hetusca 
[KS] Yo kareti. sa hetu 
(11) पथमा विभत्तिलिङ्गर्थवचने 
[SS] Pathama vibhakti lingaratthavacane 
[KS] Linga’tthe pathama 
(12) आमन्त्रणे च 
[SS] Amantrane ca 
[KS] Alapane ca 
(13) कर्मप्रबचनीयैश्च 
[SS] Karmapravacaniyesca 
[KS] Kamma'ppavacaniyayutte 
(14) नमः स्वस्तिस्वाहास्वघा5लंबश्डयोगे चतुर्थी 
[SS] Namah svasti, svaha, svadhalamva$dayoge caturatthi 
[KS] Namo yogadisva'pi ca 
(15) qafar सहयोगे 
[SS] Trtiya sahayoge 
[KS] Sahadiyoge ca 


857 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


(16) हेत्वर्थ 
[SS] Hetvaratthe 
[KS] Hetvatthe ca 
(17) कुत्पितेऽङ्गे 
[SS] Kutsitange 
[KS] Yena’ngavikaro 
(18) विशेषणे 
[SS] Visesane 
[KS] Visesane ca 
(19) कर्तरि च 
[SS] Karttari ca 
[KS] Kattari ca 
(20) कालभावयोः सप्तमी 
[SS] Kalabhavayoh saptami 
[KS] Kalabhavesu ca 
(21) स्वामिश्रापधिपति दायाद साक्षिप्रतिभूप्रसुतैः षष्ठी च 
[SS] Svamisvaradhipati dayada sakhsi pratibhü pra 
suteh sasthi ca 
[KS] Sami'ssara' dhipati, dayada, sakkhi, patibhü, pasuta, 
kusalehi ca 
(22) निर्घाणे च 
[SS] Niddharane ca 
[KS] Niddharane ca 


समास (Samasa) 


(1) नामानम्‌ समासो युक्तर्थः 
[SS] Namanarh samaso yuktratthah 
[KS] Namanarh samaso yuttattho 
(2) तत्स्था लोप्या विम्क्तयः 
[SS] Tatstha lopya vibhaktayah 
[KS] Tesam vibhattiyo lopa ca 


858 


Appendices 


(3) प्रकृतिश्च स्वरान्तस्थ 
[SS] Prakrti $ca svarantasya 
[KS] Pakati ca'ssa sara’ntassa 
(4) पदे तुल्याधिकरणे विझेयः कर्मधारयः 
[SS] Pade tulyadhikrane vifieya: karmadharyah 
[KS] Dvipade tulyadhikarane kammadharayo 
(5) संख्यापुर्वो द्विगुरिति ज्ञेयः 
[SS] Sankhyapurvo dviguriti fieyah 
[KS] Sankhyapubbo digu 
(6) तत्पुगुरुषावुमौ 
[SS] Tatpurüsa vubhau 
[KS] Ubhe tappurisa 
(7) fox द्वितियाद्य नाम्ना परपदेन तु स्मस्यन्ते समासो 
हि झेयस्तत्पुरुषः स च 
[SS] Vibhaktayo dvitiyadya namna parapadena tu 
smassayante samaso hi fiyeya statpurusah sa ca 
[KS] A’madayo parapadebhi 
(8) स्यातं यदि पदे द्वे तु यदि वा स्युबेहून्यपि । 
तान्यन्यस्य पदस्यार्थे बहुव्रीहिः 
[SS] Syatam yadi pade dve tu yadi và syurbahünyapi, 
Tanyan'yasya padasyaratthe bahuvrihih 
[KS] Afifiapada'tthesu bahubbthi 
(9)g-g: समुच्चयो नाम्नोबेहूनां वापि यो भवेत्‌ 
[SS] Dvandva: samuccayo namanorbahünam va’pi 
yo bhavet 
[KS] Namanarh samuccayo dvando 
(10) स नपुंसकलिङ्गं स्यात्‌ 
[SS] Sa napumsakalingam syat 
[KS] So napumsakalingo 
(11) पुंवद्भाषितपुंस्कातूङपूरण्यादिषु स्त्रियां तुल्याधुरणे 
[SS] Pumvadbhasita pumskanünpüranyadisu striyam 


859 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


tulyadhikrane 

[KS] Itthiyam bhasitapumi tthi puma’va ce 
(12) कर्मघारयसन्ने तु पुंवद्भावो विधीयते 

[SS] Karmadharayasafifie tu purnvadbhavo vidhiyate 

[KS] Kammadharayasaiifie ca 
(13) कोः कत्‌ 

[SS] Koh Kat 

[KS] Kad kussa 
(14) का त्वीषदर्थेऽक्षे 

[SS] Ka tvisadartthe khse 

[KS] Ka’ppatthesu ca 


तद्धित (Taddhita) 


(1) वा णपत्ये 
[SS] Và na patye 
[KS] Và na’pacce 
(2) तत्वौ भावे 
[SS] Tatvau bhave 
[KS] Nyattata bhavesu 
(3) तदस्यास्तीति मन्त्वन्त्वीन्‌ 
[SS] Tadasya stiti mantvantvin 
[KS] Satya’ dthi mantu. 
Gunadito Vantu 
Tadassatthiti vi ca (3 Suttas in Kaccayana text) 
(4) संख्यायाः पुरणे इमो 
[SS] Sankhyayah Pürane imo 
[KS] Saükhyapürane mo 
(5) द्वेस्तीयः 
[SS] Dvestiyah 
[KS] Dvitihi tiyo 


860 


Appendices 


(6) इदमो हः 
[SS] Idamo hah 


[KS] Imasma ha, dhà ca (Found in the Nàma, Nouns chapter in 
Kaccayana text) 


(7) इदमो ह्यैघुनादानिम्‌ 
[SS] Idamo rahya, dhuna, danim 


[KS] Imasma rahi, dhuna, dani ca (Found in Nama, Nouns chap- 
ter in Kaccayana text) 


(8) दादानिमौ तदः स्मृतौ 
[SS] Da, danimau tadh smrtau 


[KS] Tamha dani ca (Found in Nama, Nouns chapter in Kaccayana 
text) 


(9) प्रकाणवसने तु था 
[SS] Prakaravacane tu tha 
[KS] Sabbanamehi pakaravacane tu tha 
(10) इदम्‌किम्भ्यां थमुः कार्यैः 
[SS] Idam, kimbhyam thamuh kariyyah 
[KS] Ki' mimehi tham 
(11) वृद्धिरादौ सणे 
[SS] Vrddhi radau sane 
[KS] Vuddha'disarassa va'samyogantassa sane ca 
(12) न य्वोः पदाद्योवुँद्धिरागमः 
[SS] Na yvoh padadyor vrddhiragamah 
[KS] Ma yüna' màagamo thane 


आख्यात (Akhyata) 
(1) अथ परस्मैपदानि नव 
[SS] Atha prasmepadani nava 
[KS] Atha pubbani vibhattinam cha parassapadani 
(2) नव पणाण्यत्मने 


[SS] Nava pranyatmane 
[KS] Parany'attanopadani 


861 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


(3) त्रीणि त्रीणि प्रथम मध्य मोत्तमा 
[SS] Trini trini prathama, madhya’moktama 
[KS] Dve dve pathama, majjimu'ttama, purisa 
(4) युगपदवचने परः पुरुषणाम्‌ 
[SS] Yugapadavacane prah purusanam 
[KS] Sabbesa’mekabhidhane paro puriso 
($) नाम्नि प्रयुज्यमानेऽपि प्रथमः 
[SS] Namani payujjamane’pi prathamah 
[KS] Namamhi payujjamane'pi tulyadhikarane pathamo 
(6) युष्मदि meum: 
[SS] Yusamadi mdhyamah 
[KS] Tummhe majjimo 
(7) अस्मद्युत्तमः 
[SS] Asmadyuttamah 
[KS] Ammhe Uttamo 
(8) काले 
[SS] Kale 
[KS] Kale 
(9) सम्प्रति वर्तमाना 
[SS] Samprati Vratamana 
[KS] Vattamana paccuppanne 
(10) परोक्षा 
[SS] Prokha 
[KS] Apaccakkhe prokha'tite 
(11) पञ्चम्यनुमतौ 
[SS] Paticamya numatau 
[KS] Anaty'asitthe anuttakale paficami 
(12) मायोगे$द्यत्तीन्‌ 
[SS] Mayogedyattin 
[KS] Mayoge sabbakale ca 


862 


Appendices 


(13) षडाद्याः सार्वधातुकम्‌ 
[SS] Sadadyah sravadhatukam 
[KS] Hiyyattani, sattami, paficami, vattamana 
sabbadhatukam 
(14) प्रतययः परः 
[SS] Pratyayah prah 
[KS] Dhatulingehi para paccaya 
(15) गुप्तिजकिद्भणः सन्‌ 
[SS] Guptija kidbyah san 
[KS] Tija, gupa, kita, manehi kha, cha, sa va 
(16) घातोर्वातुमन्तादिच्छतिनैककर्तृकात्‌ 
[SS] Dhatorva tumantadicchati nekakatrikat 
[KS] Bhuja, ghasa, hara, su, pa'dihi tu' micchatthesu 
(17) नाम्न आत्मेच्छायं थिन्‌ 
[SS] Namna atme'cchayam yin 
[KS] Namammha’ tticcha’the 
(18) उपमाना दाचारे 
[SS] Upamana dacare 
[KS] Aya namato kattüpamana'dacare 
(19) चुरादेश्र 
[SS] Curade $ca 
[KS] Cura’dito ne, naya 
(20) अन्‌ विकरणः कत्तेरि 
[SS] An vikaranah kattari 
[KS] Bhüvadito a 
(21) दिवादेर्यन्‌ 
[SS] Divade ryan 
[KS] Diva’dito yo 
(22) 3: स्वादेः 
[SS] Nuh svadeh 
[KS] Svadito nuna, unà ca 


863 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


(23) ना wate: 
[SS] Na Kryadeh 
[KS] Ki’ yadito na 
(24) आत्मनेपदानि भावकर्मणोः 
[SS] Atmanepadani bhavakrammanoh 
[KS] Attanopadani bhàve ca kammani 
(25) शेषात्‌ Hat परस्मैपदम्‌ 
[SS] Sesat katri prasamepadarh 
[KS] Kattari parassapadam 
(26) द्विवेचनमनम्यासस्यौकस्वरस्याद्यस्स 
[SS] Dvirvacanamanabhyasasyaukasvarasyadysya 
[KS] Kvcadivannana mekasaranam dvebhavo 
(27) पूर्वोच्म्यासः 
[SS] Pürvo bhyasah 
[KS] Pubbo’bbhaso 
(28) द्वितियचतुर्थयो प्रथमतृतियौ 
[SS] Dvitiya, caturthayo prathama, tritiyo 
[KS] Dutiya, catutthanam pathama, tatiya 
(29) हो जः 
[SS] Ho jah 
[KS] Hassa jo 
(30) कवर्गस्य चवर्गः 
[SS] Kavargasya ca vragah 
[KS] Kavaggassa cavaggo 
(31) हस्वः 
[SS] Hrasvah 
[KS] Rasso 
(32-33) (a) मवतेरः (b) सन्यवर्णस्य 
[SS] (a) Bhavaterah (b) Sanya varnasya [2 Suttas] 
[KS] Antassi’vanna’karo và 


864 


Appendices 


(34) अस्योकारः सार्वधातुकेऽगुणे 
[SS] Asayokarah sarvadhatuke gune 
[KS] Karassa’karo ca 
(35) अस्तेरादेः 
[SS] Asateradeh 
[KS] Sabbattha'sassa'dilopo ca 
(36-37) (a) गोहेरूदुपघायाः (b) gA: कारिते 
[SS] (a) Gohe rüdupdhayah (b) Duse karite [2 Suttas] 
[KS] Guha, dusanam dtharh 
(38) अस्ते भूरसावेधातुके 
[SS] Asater bhür sarvadhatuke 
[KS] Asabbadhatuke bhü 
(39) गमिष्यमां छः 
[SS] Gamisyamam chah 
[KS] Gamissanto ccho và sabbasu 
(40) पः पिबः 
[SS] Pah pivah 
[KS] Pa pivo 
(41) स्था स्तिष्ठः 
[SS] Stha stisthah 
[KS] tha titho 
(42) दृशोः पश्यः 
[SS] Drsoh Pasyah 
[KS] Disassa passa, dissa, dakkha va 
(43) ज्ञाश्च 
[SS] fia $ca 
[KS] fiassa ja jam na 
(44) अणिवचेरोदुपघायाः 
[SS] Anivacerodupadhayah 
[KS] Vacassa’jjatanimhi’makaro o 


865 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 
कित (Kita) 
(1) तव्यानीयौ 


[SS] Tavya ntyau 
[KS] Bhavakammesu tabba’ntya 
(2) ते कृत्या 
[SS] Te krtya 
[KS] Te Kicca 
(3) नन्द्देर्युः 
[SS] Nandyaderyuh 
[KS] Nanda'dihi yu 
(4) कर्मण्यण्‌ 
[SS] Karma nyan 
[KS] Dhatuya kammadimhi no 
(5) क्विप्‌ च 
[SS] Kvip ca 
[KS] Kvi ca 
(6,7,8) (9) कर्मण्युपमाने त्यदादौ दृशष्टकसकौ च 
(०)इदमी (0) किम्‌ की 
[SS] (a) Kramanyupamane tydadau drsasakaskau ca 
[SS] (b) Ida mi (c) Kim ki 
[KS] I, ya, ta, ma, kir, esana'mantassaro digham kvaci 
disassa gunam do ram sakhi ca 
(9) ञ्यनुबन्धमतिबुद्धिप्‌जार्थैम्यः क्तः 
[SS] àyanuvandha, mati, vuddhi, pujarthabhyah ktah 
[KS] Bhya'dihi mati, budhi, puja’ dthi ca kto 
(10) मविश्यतिगम्यादयः 
[SS] Bhavi$yati gamyadyah 
[KS] Bhavissati gama’ dihi ni, ghin 
(11) वुणतुमौ कियायं कियार्थायम्‌ 
[SS] Vun tumau kriyayam kriyarathayam 
[KS] Kiriyayam nvu, tavo 


866 


Appendices 


(12) माववाचिनश्व 
[SS] Bhàvavacinafi$ca 
[KS] Bhavavacimhi catutthi 
(13) कर्मेणि चाण्‌ 
[SS] Karmani can 
[KS] Kammani no 
(14) शन्त्रानौ स्यसंहितौ शेषे च 
[SS] Santranau syasarihitau ese ca 
[KS] Sese ssantu, mana’na 
(15) पदगुजविशस्पृह शोचां घञ्‌ 
[SS] Padarujavisasprha $ocam ghafi 
[KS] Visa, ruja, padadito na 
(16) भावे 
[SS] Bhave 
[KS] Bhave ca 
(17) स्त्रियां क्ति 
[SS] Striyam kti 
[KS] Itthiya' matiyavo và 
(18) इच्छार्थेष्वेककतृकेषु तुम्‌ 
[SS] Icchartthe saveka krattrikesu tum 
[KS] Icchatthesu samanakattukesu tave, tum va 
(19) अवश्यकाघमिणयो णि 
[SS] Avasyka dhaminayo ni 
[KS] Avassaka’dhaminesu ni ca 
(20) कर्तरि कृतः 
[SS] Krattari krtah 
[KS] Kattari kit 
(21) मावकर्मणो कृत्यत्तखर्लर्थाः 
[SS] Bhava karmano krtya, kta, khalara'tthah 
[KS] Bhavakammesu kicca, kta, kkha'ttha 


867 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


(22) समास्ते भाविन्यनञः त्तवो सप्‌ 
[SS] Samase bhavinyafi ktvo yap 
[KS] Sabbehi tunadinam yo 
(23) चजोः कगौ घुडघानुबन्धयौः 
[SS] Cajoh kagau ghudaghanuvandhayauh 
[KS] Ka, gà ca, janam 


उणादि (Unadi) 


(1) खर्जिकृपिमसिपिञ्जालादिम्यः ऊरोलौ 
[SS] Khrajikripimasipificaladibya ürolau 
[KS] Vida’ dthiht’ro 
(2) सर्वधातुम्ये मन्‌ 
[SS] Sarvadhatubye man 
[KS] Khya’dthi man, ma ca to và 
(3) TATE: 
[SS] Prathe ramah 
[KS] Puthassa puthu, pathāmo vā 
(4-5) (a) मनेरुष्य: (७) मानेरुषः 
[SS] (a) Mane rüshyah (b) Mane rüshah 
[KS] Manupürasuna' dthi usa, nusi’sa 
(6) मडिकुडिमडिगम्येऽलः 
[SS] Madi, kudi, mangibhyo lah 
[KS] Patadihya'lam 


Total: 142. 


868 


Appendices 


Gender Classification 


Knowing and determining the gender of a specific Pali word and 
being able to use it properly is one important characteristic of a 
true Pali scholar. It is a very delicate skill which can be slowly 
developed through a thorough understanding of the structural 
dynamic of a word and long-term study of the language. In this 
appendix, the gender of compounds, taddhita-affixes and kita- 
suffixes are shown being classified into the specific gender 
groups. Please note that this is not a definitive guide as there 
are two kinds of words, the ones having a fixed gender and those 
having variable genders. If a word is shown as being of variable 
gender, it means that the word may become either feminine or 
neuter depending on its contextual meaning and usage though it 
is shown as being masculine. This process used to occur when 
either used contextually or as an adjective which modifies an- 
other word of either neuter or feminine meaning despite it is 
originally specified as masculine. Note: The gender of most of 
the ordinary nouns are not shown here as it is to be explained in 
a separate book. 











869 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


The Gender of Compound Nouns 




















Name of com- Gender Reference 
pound 
Abyayibhava Neuter Gender so napumsakalingo 
(Adverbial compound) (Kaccayana Sutta 320) 
Kammadharaya abhidheyavacano, para- 
(Appositional com- Variable gender or | lingo ca. (Rüpasiddhi, Sutta 
pound) it follows the gen- 341) 
der of the last com- 
ponent word. 
Digu Neuter gender, usu- digusse'kattam 
(Numeral Appositional ally singular but (Kaccayana Sutta 321) 
compound) can also be plural 
sometimes. 
ayafi’ca tappuriso ab- 
Tappurisa Variable gender hidheyavacanalingo 
(Determinative com- (Rüpasiddhi, Sutta 351) 
pound) 
Dvanda Mostly neuter gen- samahare napurhsakarh 


(Copulative compound) 


der but variable in 


(Moggalana Sutta 20, 3rd 








some instances as chapter) 
per the gender of 
last component 
word. 
Bahubbthi Variable gender as bahubbthi ca’yarh ab- 
(Attributive compound) | per the contextual hidheyalingavacano. 





meaning of the 
afifiapada i.e. the 
external word of 


attributive meaning. 





(Rüpasiddhi, Sutta 352) 





870 





Appendices 


The Gender of Taddhita-affixes 

The possible and applicable gender of words suffixed with each 
specific taddhita-affix are shown in the tables below. If a certain 
taddhita-affix is shown as being variable gender, it will be af- 
fixed with an additional suffix such as à or 1 or int in order to 
signify the feminine gender. In some cases where contextually 
used as an adjective or adverb, the gender tends to be variable. 
This used to occur in the words affixed with non-patronymic 
affixes. For masculine and neuter genders, one affix is quite a 
normative pattern along with the necessary morphological de- 
rivative of the applicable case-ending. 
























































Name of Affix & gender Note 
Taddhita Sutta number 
Apacca Taddhita | na (344) Basically mascu- 
(Patronymic Affix- | nayana, nana | line but can also 
es) (345) be variable gen- 
8 affixes as similar | neya (346) der 
ones are counted as | ni (347) Masculine 
one nika (as per | Basically mascu- 
*va" of 347) line and variable 
nava (348) 
nera (349) 
Ane’kattha Tad- | nika (350- | Masculine but 
dhita 351) variable when 
6 affixes na (352) contextually used 
ima, iya (353) as an adjective 
ima, iya, ika etc. 
(by "adi" of 
353) 
kiya (by “ca” 
of 353) 
samüha kan, na (354) Masculine 
2 affixes ta (355) Feminine 
ta’ dassathana iya (356) Mostly neuter but 
variable when used. 
as adjective. 
| upamà | ayitatta (357) Neuter 














871 





Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 























tan’nissitattha | la (358) Mostly neuter 
bahula alu (359) Variable An extra “ka” is 
added sometimes. 
e.g. dayaluko 
bhava nya, tta (360) 
(Abstract condi- ttana (by “tu” | Neuter gender 
tions) of 360) 
5 affixes ta (360) Always feminine 
gender 
na (361) Neuter gender 
visesa (Compari- tara, tama, Variable gender 

































































son) isika, iya, 
5 affixes ittha (363) 
ta’ dassa'tthi vi (364) Mostly mascu- 
9 affixes so (by “ca” of | line but can also 
364) be variable gen- 
sī (365) der 
ika, 1 (366) 
ra (367) 
vantu (368) 
mantu (369) 
na (370) 
tappakati maya (372) Variable gender 
Numerical Taddhita-affixes 
Sankhya Affix & Sutta Gender Note 
Taddhita number 
(Numerical tad- ma (373) Variable gender 
dhita nouns) 1 (375) Feminine 
5 affixes ti (378, 389) Feminine “ti” is not an af- 
fix but an insert- 
ed one or a deriv- 
ative morpheme. 
tiya (385) Variable 
ka (392) Neuter 














872 








Abyaya-taddhita affixes 


Appendices 








Abyaya 
taddhita 
(Indeclinable 
Taddhita) 

6 affixes 


Affix & Sutta 


Gender 


Note 





dhà (397) 





so (by “ca” of 
397) 





tha (398) 





thatta (by “tu” of 
398) 





tham (399) 








khatturh (646 
Unadisutta) 





No gender, no 
word-form 
change 





Used as adverb 
or adjective 





Abyaya affixes applied after Sabbanama-nouns 
(All these affixes are used as substitutes for certain noun case-endings, espe- 


cially the ablative or locative cases) 








Indeclinable 
Noun Affixes 15 
(Shown in the 5th 
section of Nouns 

chapter and the 
3rd section, Kita 
chapter) 









































Affix & Sutta Gender Use 
To express rea- 
to (248) son or time 
No Gender 
tra, tha (249) z 
dhi (250) 0 express po- 
va (251) sition or place 
hirh, ham, 
hificanam (252) 
ha, dha (254) 
dà, dacanam To express time 
(257) 
rahi, dhuna, 
dani (259) 
jja, jju (571) To express day 











873 








Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


Kita Affixes & Gender 

The majority of kita-affixes, except quite a few, do not have a fixed 
gender. Even though it is shown as being a specific gender, it can be 
of variable gender in some cases. With the exception of those suffixed 
with verbal affixes, any word affixed with other non-verbal kita-affix 
may belong to a specific gender. Therefore, the applicable and likely 
gender of the words suffixed with a specific kita-affix are shown in 
three tables; (a) one for the verbal affixes, (b) one for the gerund af- 
fixes and (c) one for the affixes which help form to become certain 
individual noun words. The majority of Unadi-affixes, except some 
verbal affixes, are used mainly in the formation of individual nouns of 
varying genders. Therefore, it is not shown here separately as it is as- 
sumed to be easily inferable for any keen student of Pali. 


(a) The Verbal Affixes 
























































Affix & Voice Gender Use 
Sutta 
tabba (540) Variable as per the 
aniya (540) Passive or imper- | corresponding syn- 
sonal. tactic relative Verb or adjec- 
Mostly passive word. tive 

nya (541) voice use is more Basically neuter 
teya (by “00” | frequently found | but variable some- 
of 541) in the Pali litera- times. 
kha (560) ture. 
ta (555, 556, | Active, Passive or Variable 
557) impersonal 

(b) The Affixes which serve as gerund or Auxiliary verbs 

Affix & Voice Gender Use 

Sutta 
tave (561) No voice to-infinitive 
tum (561, No gender 
562, 563) 
tuna, tvana, No voice, but the 
tva (564) nature of active Gerund 
voice is more pro- 
nounced. 














874 





Appendices 








mana, anta 
(565) 





Active or Passive 

as per the absence 

or presence of cor- 
responding addi- 

tional affix “ya.” 


Variable gender as 
per the corre- 
sponding syntactic 
relative word. 





Present partici- 
ple 
or adjective or 
adverb 








(c) Affixes which form the Individual noun words 










































































No Affix & Sutta Gender Use 
1 na ( 524, 528, 529) Variable 
2 a (525, 526, 527, 553) Variable The formation of 
3 nvu, tu, avi (527) Masculine Individual Noun. 
4 kvi (530) Masculine 
5 ramma (531) Neuter & Mascu- Note: Even 
line though it is 
[6 | pī, tu, āvī (532) Masculine shown as being 
7 yu (533, 553) Variable belonging to a 
|8  |rü(534, 535) Masculine specific gender, it 
[9  |nuka (536) Masculine can be of variable 
10 [ra (538) Variable gender. 
11 ricca (542) Neuter 
12 i (551) Variable 
13 ti (552, 553) Always Feminine 
14 ririya (554) Feminine but vari- 
able 
15 tavantu, tavi (555) Masculine 
16 ina (558, 559) Neuter & Mascu- 
line 
17 ratthu (566) Masculine 
18 ritu (567) Masculine 
19 ratu (567) Feminine 
20 tuka (569) Masculine 
21 ika (570) Masculine 

















875 








Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


KACCAYANA DHATVA’VALI 
The Index of Roots in Kaccayana Text 


Note: The roots are like the basic building blocks of various Pali 
words. One can multiply various verb-forms and nouns by using 
different verb-terminations and applicable affixes. Therefore, it 
is quite important to have some basic knowledge of the roots. 
Below is an alphabetical order of the roots in the list. (a) The 
root called dhatu is shown in bold. (b) Its meaning called Dhat- 
vattha-pavedana is shown in italicized Pali followed by English. 
(c) The Sutta numbers where example word of the root are 
found, are shown alongside. [dhatvattha-dhatu-the root attha- 
meaning+pavedana-letting it be known, i.e. declaration.] 


Usually, dhatvatthapavedana is a kita-affixed noun in locative 
singular case-ending which may be affixed with one of yu, na, a 
or ti affixes. 

(1) When it is affixed in “yu”, it will end in “ane, ane, ane, 
ane". e.g. Kathane, sarane, dane, ñāņe . 

(2) When affixed in na or a, it will end in just an “e” with or 
without a vuddhi function in the word. e.g. Pake, Naye. 

(3) When affixed in “ti”, it will be just plain “ti” ending in yam 
or mhi. e.g. gatiyam, gatimhi. (yam and mhi are derivative 
morpheme of locative singular *smim". Refer to Sutta 216, 
99) 


A dhatvatthapavedana usually declares the meaning of the root 
as an action (kriya’ttha) such as “to go, to speak" and so on. 
But in some rare instances, there are a few roots which may 
mean the substance (dabba 'ttha) rather than being an action. 
e.g., palla-ninnathane-in being low-lying area. 

Please note that generally some roots may have one single 
meaning but there are roots with more than one meaning. Some 
of the roots may even change their original meaning in many 
distinctive ways when prefixed with various upasagga particles. 


876 


Appendices 


Also note that any root having the meaning of “gati-to move, to 
go" may even mean “to know, to be or to reach" which is a bit 
like English verb *get" which has a rich variety of meanings in 
various contextual usages. All of the roots are drawn from 
Akhyata, Kita and Unadi chapters totaling 273. 


a 
The numbers inside — indicate the Sutta numbers. 
agga-gatikotille-to move in a non-straight way. (665) 
aja-gatimhi-to go (638) 
ada-bhakkhane-to consume, to eat (627) 
adi-andatthe-to lay the egg. (663) 
apa-papune-to reach (448) 
ama-roge-to afflict,(664) 
aya-gatimhi-to go, to be (528) 
ala-samatthe-to be able to, (632) 
asa-bhuvi-to be (492-494) bhakkhane-to eat (641). (9) 


[a] 


asa-upavesane-to approach, to devote (540) (1) 


[i] 
i-gatiyam-to go, to move (when prefixed with “adhi”, it means 
to learn, to recite (635). 
ikkha-pekkhane-to look to, to see (277) 
iji-kampane-to shake (638) 
idi-paramissariye-to lord over (661) 
ila-kampane-to tremble, (673) 
isidi-avamaddane-to press down, to crush (663) 
issa-issayam-to be jealous of. (277) 
isidi-vimaddane-to press. (663) 
isu-icchayam-to want (522) (9) 


877 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


[u] 
uca-samavaye-to manifest together (640). 
viyattiyam vacayam-to articulately speak (580) 
udi-pasavane-to increase. (661) 
udha-usagge-to discard, to throw (441) 
usu-dahe-to burn (659) 
usuya-usuydyar-to be envious of. (277) (5) 


[e] 
eradi-himsdyam-to torture, (663) (1) 


[ka] 
kaca-dittiyam-to shine (638) 
kata-maddane-to thrash (672) 
katha-kathane-to speak (564) 
kadi-chedane-to cut (663) 
kada-madde-to inebriate (665) 
kappa-takkane-to think (643) 
kapi-calane-to shake (533) 
kapu-himsd, takkala, gandhesu-to torture, in being the smell of 
tree sap (670) 
kamu-padavikkhepe-to move steps, to go (458). 
(also) icchayam-to want (524) 
kamba (also) kabi-saricalane-to shake (665) 
kara-karane-to do (451) 
karadi-bhdjane-to distribute as in small cups (663) 
kala-sankhydne-to count (632) 
ki-himsayam-to torment (673) 
ki, ki-dabbavinimaye-to sell, to trade (449) 
kita-rogapanayane-to cure as diseases. kankhayam-to doubt 
(433) 
kira-vikirane-to spread, to cast all over (581) 
ku-sadde-to sound. (670) kucchite-in being disgusted (673) 
kuca-samkocane-to hesitate (638) 
kuta-chedane-to cut. (672) 


878 


Appendices 


kuthi-chedane-to cut (663) 

kudha-kopane-to be angry (533) 

kura-akkose-to revile (670) 

kusa-akkose (498) chedana, bhüta, dana, sancayesu-to cut, to 
be, to give, to accumulate (665) acchada, pürane-to cover, 

to fill up (672) (23) 


[kha] 
khajja-bhakkhane-to eat (670) 
khadi-chedane-to cut (663) 
khanu-avadarane-to dig (586) 
khamu-sahane-to bear, to put up with (584) 
khadha-bhakkhane-to eat, to munch (664) 
khida-khede-to be weary, to tire out (582) 
khi-Ahaye-to run out of, to have no more (627) 
khuda-pipasayam-to be hungry (661) (8) 


[ga] 
gati-ghattane-to strike (663) 
gadi-sannicaye-to gather 
gamu-gatimhi-to go, to move (476) 
garaha-ninddyam-to censure (544) 
gaha-upadane-to cling to, to grab, to take (450) 
gahu-vilolane-to mess up (589) 
gupa-nindayam-to censure, also, gopane-to protect (433) 
guha-rakkhane-to protect, to hide (486) 
ge-sadde-to sound, to sing (608) (9) 


[gha] 
ghata-cetayam-to incite (484) 
ghadi-ghattane-to strike as a bell (663) 
ghasa-bhakkhane-to eat (434) 
ghusa-sadde-to sound, ghosane-to say loudly (533) (4) 


879 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


[ca] 
cadi-icchà, kantisu-to want, to delight (661) 
cadi-cande-in being harsh (663) 
cara-carane-to practice (524), gatiyam-to move, to go (631) 
cala-calane-to shake (533) 
citi-cintayam-to be aware (656),(also) cetayam-to spur, to incite 
(553) 
cinta-cintayam-to think, to be aware (452) 
ल, ci-caye-to accumulate (668) pujayam-to honor (when pre- 
fixed with “apa” as in 643) 
cu-cavane-to move, to die (513) 
cura-thene-to steal (452) (9) 


[cha] 
chada-chddane-to cover as with a roof (582) 
apavare-to prevent (656) 
chidi-dvidhakarane-to cut into two, to cut (661) (2) 


[jal 
jana-janane-to cause to happen (454) 
jara-jirane-to degenerate, to get old (also) vayohanimhi-to 
fade out of youthful-age (Both imply the same meaning though 
different in usage of Pali words) (505) 
ji-jaye-to conquer, to win (445) 
juta-jotane-to shine (533) (4) 


[ña] 
fia-Zane-to know (470) (1) 


[ta] 
takka-rukkhasilese-in being tree-sap (665). 
takkane-to think (643) 
tadi-calane-to shake (663) 
tatha-tacche-in being true (638) 
tanu-vitthare-to stretch (451) 
tapa-santape-to heat (580) 


880 


Appendices 


tara-tarane-to cross over such as a river (581) 
tija-khantiyam-to bear, to be patient with. (433) 
tira-adhobhage-in being horizontal (638) 
tuda-byasane-to peck, to strike (638) 
tura-vege-to hasten (581) 

tusa-tosane or pitivam-to be joyous. (573) (11) 


[th] 
tha-thane,(also) gatinivattimhi-to stop going, to stand (468) 


[da] 
dada-dane-to give (526) 
dadi-dnayam-to enforce authority, to fine (663) 
damu-damane-to tame, to train (584) 
damsa-damsane-to bite (573) 
dara-dahe-to burn (628) 
dala-duggatimhi-to impoverish. (661) 
dala-dittiyam-to shine (458) 
dava-dahe-to burn (644) 
daha-dahe-to burn (614) 
da-dane-to give (482) avakhandane-to cut (656) 
divu-jutiyam-to shine (447) kilayam-to play, to frolic. 
disa-pekkhane-to see (471) uccarane-to utter, to speak (556) 
diha-vuddhimhi-to grow as human body or trees (621) 
du-gatiyam-to move (628) 
dusa-ndse-to spoil (486) 
duha-dohane-to milk (313) düsane-spoil. (16) 


[dha] 
dhara-dharane-to carry (531) 
dha-dharane (459) 
dhara-dharane (277) 
dhü-kampane-to shake (449) 
dhe-pane-to cause to drink (671) (5) 


881 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


[na] 
nata-gattavikkhepe-to dance, to sway the body (571) 
namu-pandme-to bow as in respect (Begininng Verses) 
nanda-nandane-to be pleased (547) 
ninda-ninddyam-to censure, to chide (562) 
naha-bandhane-to bind, to entangle (589) 
niti-nicce-in being eternal (638) 
ni-naye-to carry (514) 
nuda-panüdane-to extract, to pull out, khepe-to throw, to rid of 
(641) (8) 


[pal 
paca-pake-to cook. (445) 
paci-vitthare-to extend, to enlarge. (665) 
pata-gatimhi-to move (309) 
patha-viyattiyam vàcayam-to speak articulately, to recite (445) 
pata-gatimhi, patane-to move or to fall (669) 
pada-gatimhi-to move (also) -pavattane-to be (656) 
padi-/ingavekalle-in being sexually deviant (663) 
palla-ninnathane-in being low-lying area (665) 
phala-nipphattiyam-to bear fruit, to accomplish (443) 
pisa-saficunne-to pulverize, to crush to become powder (638) 
piha-sinehe-to love, to admire,(277) 
pà-pane-to drink (469) palane-to protect. 
pr-tappane-to enrapture, to be pleased with (627) 
pu-pavane-to purify (449) 
puccha-pucchayam-to question (573) 
putha-vitthare-to stretch (665) 
pura-purane-to fill (581) 
püja-pujayam-to honor, to worship (583) (18) 


[pha] 


phadi-ca/ane-to shake (533) 
phusa-pAusane-to touch, to come in contact (528) (2) 


882 


Appendices 


[ba] 
bhadi-bhandane-to argue, to quarrel (663) 
baha-vuddhimhi-to grow (589) 
bahu-sankhydne-to count (665) 
bila-nissaye-in being a dependent base (665) 
budha-/ane-to know (557) (5) 


[bha] 
bhaganda-secane-to pour, to drip (665) 
bhaja-vibhage-to distribute (651) (also) 
bhanja-avamaddane-to press down, to crush (573) 
bhana-kathane-to speak (227) 
bhamu-anavathdne-to be unable to stand firmly, to be fickle, 
to spin around just as a top (584) 
bhasa-bhasamikarane-to pulverize, to make into ash as in 
burning (628) bhakkhane-to eat (638) 
bha-dittiyam-to shine (671) 
bhasa-kathane-to speak (533) jutiyam-to shine. 
bhikkha-yacane-to beg (535) 
bhidi-dvidhakarane-to divide into two, to break (582) 
bhi-bhaye-to fear (627) 
bhuja-bhakkhane-to eat. (also) palane-to protect (578) 
bhü-sattayam-to be (445) 
bhisa-alankare-to adorn, to beautify (533) 
brü-viyattiyam vacdyam-to speak (520) (15) 


[ma] 
maca-core-to steal (665) 
maja-parimajjane-to massage, to rub all over (441) 
manga-mangale-in being auspicious. (665) 
manta-guttabhasane-to whisper as in private talk or 
discussion (452) 
matha-vilolane-to mess up (502) 
mada-ummade-to inebriate, in being mad, (544) 
madi-hase-to amuse (661) 


883 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


madi-mandane-to adorn, to beautify (663) 

mana-/idne-to know (444) 

mara-marane-to die (505) 

masa-amasane-to caress, to fondle, to rub (670) 
maha-püjayam-to honor (502) 

ma-mane-to measure (502) 

mana-vimamsdyam-to analytically think (also) sammanane-to 
adore (433) 

mida-sinehe-to adore, to love (658) 

mekha-kativicitte-to adorn waist as with a belt. 
medi-kufile-in being not straight as horns of an animal 
muna-iidne-to know (449) 

musa-theye-to steal (665) panacage-to give up on life, to die 
(638) vinase-to lose, to disappear 

muha-vecitte-to be confused. 

muila-patithayam-to take root, to establish (665) (21) 


[४१] 
yaja-püjayam-to offer sacrifice to, to honor (503) 
yata-payatane-to exert effort (656) 
yamu-viratiyam, or uparamane-to abstain from (522) 
ya-gativam-to move, to go (628) 
yuja-yoge-to tie up, to yoke, to bind (544) 
yudha-pahare-to strike, to hit (447) (6) 


[ra] 
rakkha-rakkhane-to protect, to guard. 
radi-hirmisayam-to torture, to hurt as a drunkard 
rabha-drambhe-to exert effort (600) 
ranja-rdge-to dye as with color, to lust for (578) 
ramu-ratiyam-to enjoy (587) 
raha-upadane-to cling to (628) 
radha-samsiddhiyam-to accomplish (277) 
ri-gatiyam-to move (671) 
ru-gatimhi-to move,(also) sadde-to sound (627) 


884 


Appendices 


ruca-rocane-to shine (454) 

ruja-roge-to pain, to be afflicted. (528) 
ruda-rodane-to lament, to cry as in sadness (582) 
rudi-himsayam-to torture, to harm (661) 
rudha-avarane-to obstruct (446) 

ruha-drohane-to go up as on a tree or building (589) 
rusa-rosane-to harass (638) (16) 


[la] 
ladi-jegucche-in being disgusted as excrement. 
labha-/abhe-to get, to obtain (497) 
lipa-/epane-to anoint, to smear (580) 
Iü-chedane-to cut, to clip (449) (4) 


[va] 
vakka-rukkhattace-in being tree-bark (665) 
vaja-gatimhi-to move (638) 
vatu-avattane-to turn round,(also) pavattane-to be (656) 
vada-viyattiyam vàcáyam-to speak (Akhyata verse) 
vadi-sanghdte-to gather collectively as in a bunch (663) 
vaddha-vaddhane-to grow, to thrive (533) 
vanda-vandane-to bow as in a show of respect (597) 
vamu-uggirane-to vomit (584) 
vapa-bijanikkhepe-to cast the seed, to sow (654) 
vara-samvarane-to protect (656) 
valla-bandhane-to bind, to entangle (670) 
vasa-nivdse-to dwell (487) acchadane-to cover up (665) 
vaha-papune-to arrive at, vahane-to carry (487) 
va-gatimhi-to go (650) 
vica-viveke-to be alone, to dissociate from (578) vicaye-to 
analyze. 
vida-idne-to know (616) anubhavane-to feel (553) sattayam-to 
be (665) /abhe-to obtain (670) 
vidha-vijjhane-to penetrate, to pierce into (444) 
visa-pavesane-to enter (528) 


885 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranam 


vu-samvarane-to protect (448) 

ve-bahisare-in being external essence (671), 

(also) tantasantane-to weave fabrics as a weaver (524). 
vepu-kampane-to shake (644) (21) 


[sa] 
saka-samatthe-to be able to (583) 
sata-satacce-in being eternal, to endure always (638) 
sada-nisidane-to sit (609) visadane-to tire,(638) 
sadda-sadde-to sound (533) harite-in being lush green (665) 
sadi-gumbatthe-in being clusters (663) 
sanja-sange-to cling to (578) 
sapa-akkose-to revile, upalabbhe-to swear in order to win trust. 
sama-upasame-to calm (628) 
samu-upasame-to calm (584) nivase-to dwell, khede-to be tired. 
samba (sabi) -mandane-to adorn (665) 
sara-sarane-to remember (512) 
sala-gatiyam-to go (632) 
sasu-himsayam-to torture (667) 
sa-samatthe-to be able to (628) 
sasa-anusitthimhi-to instruct, to teach (556) 
si-bandhane-to bind (628) 
sida-sirigare-in being serene and romantic (670) 
sidha-samsiddhimhi-to accomplish, to succeed (611) 
sica-secane-to pour liquid on (580) 
silagha-thutiyam-to praise (277) 
sivu-sibbane-to sew, to stitch (447) 
si, sI-saye-to sleep, to lie down (644) 
su-savane-to listen to (434) abhisave-to flow (656) 
gabbhavimocane-in being cleared of clouds (673) 
himsayam (673) 
suca-soke-to be sad,(661) 
suna-Aimsa, kulasantànesu-to harass, to prolong family lineage 
(673) 
supa-soppe-to fall sleep (559) 


886 


subha-pahare-to strike, to hit (446) 
susa-sosane-to dry, to wither (583) 
sü-pilane-to torment (660) 
süca-vibhavane-to clarify (656) 
süda-paggharane-to drip, to ooze (641) (31) 


[ha] 
hana-himsayam-to torture (586) 
hara-harane-to carry over (434) 
hasa-hasane-to smile (556) 
hansa-pahamsane-to be happy (573) 
ha-cage-to abandon, to dump (464) 
hi-gatiyam (628) 
hu-püjayam-to offer sacrifice (464) 


hü-sattayam-to come into being, to be (480) (8) 


887 


Appendices 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


Index 
Note: The index is arranged in a chapter-wise, alphabetical 
order for easy access. S means Sutta while P means page. 


1 Introduction 


A quick study guide of Samasa P, 43 
Kaccayana and his identity P, 14 
Pali Grammar Study Guide P, 38 
Rüpasiddhi P, 48 

Sub-Units of grammar Study P, 44 
The Components of a Sutta P, 35 
The Steps of Effective Learning P, 33 
Three Kinds of EDs P, 45 

Types of Sandhi P, 38 

Types of Vidhi P, 37 

WA (Word Analysis) P, 47 


1 Sandhi 


Aghosa(surds) S.9/P, 124 

Akkhara (Alphabet) S.2/P, 118 

Asarüpa (Non-homogenous vowel) S.13/P, 129 

Asavanna S.13/P, 129 

Byanfijana (Consonant) S.6/P, 121 

Digha (Long vowel) S.5/P, 120 

Dvebhavo (act of doubling, Reduplication) S.28/P, 149 

Ghosa(sonant) S.9/P, 124 

Niggahita (an upper dot of nasal sound which is placed on 
top of three short vowels) S.8/P, 123 

Pakati procedure S.23,24/P, 143 

Rassa (Short vowel) S.4/P, 120 

Sara (vowel) S.3/P, 119 

Sarüpa (Homogenous vowel) S.13/P, 129 

Savanna S.13/P, 129 

Suttavibhaga (Split-Sutta procedure) S.20/P, 138 


888 


Index 


Table of Reduplication with Dissimilar Consonants 
S.29/P, 151 

Table of Reduplication with Similar Consonants S.28/P, 
150 

Upasagga particles S.51/P, 177 

Vagga (Group of five consonants classified as a vagga- 
group) S.7/P, 122 

Vagganta-Function (changing an upper dot into one of five 
nasal stops, 157 

Vagganta-the end consonants of the group, sometimes 
referred as "nasal stops" S.7/P, 122 

Visafifioga procedure (Changing conjunct into non- 
conjunct) S.41/P, 169 

Yutte (Applicability) S.11/P, 126 


2 Nama 


“a” and “T” “पा” affixes signify feminine gender. S.237, 
238, 240/P, 351 

20 Upasagga Words S.221/P, 322 

Adhikara (governing rule) S.52/P, 183 

Akatarassa (Natural short vowel) S.96/P, 229 

Alutta Samasa S.77/P, 209 

Avadharana (Limitation) S.79/P, 211 

aya(Infinitive form of nouns) S.109/P., 240 

Bhavaniddesa (abstract wording of Sutta) S.90/P, 224 

Detailed Meanings of Upasagga Particles S.221/P, 324 

Different Usages of vocative form "Bhavanta" S.243/P, 
355 

Jinavacanayutta S.52/P, 183 

Karanta (ending vowel of nouns) S.55/P, 189 

Linga(Gender) S.53/P, 184 

Nipata Particles S.221/P, 341 

Ntu affixes S.92/P, 225 

Recognition of nta-affix as an equal of ntu-affix S.187/P, 
302 


889 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


Recognition of “sma” vibatti as “na” S.270/P, 371 

Salient characteristic of Mano-group nouns S.183/P, 297 

sam, sa function S.179, 293 

santa (saint) changes into “sa” S.185/P, 299 

Saralopo Sutta & two major functions S.83/P, 216 

Tabbiparita (reversal procedure) S.79/P, 211 

Temporary Terms For Some Endings S.55/P, 190 

Three functions debarred in Sabbanama nouns S.110/P, 
242 

Three kinds of Upasagga particles S.221/P, 323 

to, ti, ta function S.127/P, 255 

Traces of vibatti-forms S.220/P, 320 

ve, vo function S.116/P, 247 

Vibatti (14 noun case-endings) S.54-55/P, 186 

vo, no function S.147,151/P, 267, 271 

yà function S.112/P, 244 

Yogavibaga (split-Sutta procedure) S.80/P, 213 


3 Karaka 


Ablative of reason S.296/P, 421 

Accantasamyoga(on-going condition) S.298/P, 422 

Accusative case in Genetive sense S.306/P, 431 

Accusative in Instrumental S.307/P, 431 

Accusative in Locative S.307/P, 431 

Adhara, Locative (of four kinds) S.278/P, 408 

Alapana(vocative) S.285/P, 413 

Ana’dara S.305/P, 428 

Ana’ dara-Catukka S.305/P, 429 

Angavikara(Defective body part) S.291/P, 416 

Apadana(Ablative) S.271/P, 373 

Avuta Katta (non-principal subject in a passive voice) 
S.288/P, 415 

Binna’dhikarana Visesana S.292/P, 417 

Genitive in Ablative S.309/P, 434 

Genitive in Accusative S.309/P, 434 


890 


Index 


Genitive in Instrumental S.308/P, 432 

Genitive in Locative S.308/P, 432 

Hetu Katta or Causative subject S.282/P, 412 

Instrumental in the Locative sense S290/P, 416 

Instrumental of reason S.289/P, 416 

Kamma, the Object S.280/P, 410 

Kamma'ttha-chatthi (Object-genitive or patient genitive) 
S.309/P, 434 

Kammappavacaniya (Kamma-enhancer particle) S.299/P, 
423 

Karana, the instrumental S.279/P, 410 

Kattu or Katta (subject), 411 

Katv’ attha-Chatthi (Subject-genitive or Agent genitive) 
S.308/P, 432 

Lakkhana S.313/P, 437 

Locative in Ablative S.312/P, 436 

Locative in Accusative S.310/P, 435 

Locative in Dative S.311/P, 436 

Locative in Instrumental S.310/P, 435 

Locative of reason (also called absolute or nimitta sattam1) 
S.310/P, 435 

Niddharana(Selection) S.304/P, 426 

Niddharana-Catukka S.304/P, 427 

Okasa or adhara S.278/P, 408 

Sami (the owner, possessive) S.283/P, 413 

Sampadana(Recipient) S.278/P, 391 

Six Karaka and Applicable Vibattis S.273/P, 374 

Ta'dattha Sampadana S.277/P, 401 

Tulya'dhikarana Visesana S.292/P, 417 

Tumattha Sampadana S.277/P, 402 

Visesana S.292/P, 417 


4 Samasa 


Abyayibhava (the nature of) S.319/P, 446 
Afifiapadattha S.328/P, 460 


891 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


Bahubbthi (the nature of) S.328/P, 459 

Digu (Characteristic of) S.325/P, 455 

Dvanda (the nature of) S.329/P, 481 

Elision of vibatti(case-endings) and related things S.317/P, 
444 

Endings of Abyayibhava Compound S.343/P, 493 

Gender and number of Digu S.321/P, 448 

Gender of abyayibhava S.320/P, 448 

Kammadharaya (The characteristic of) S.324/P, 454 

Pakati procedure for compound nouns and Taddhita nouns 
S.317/P, 445 

Tappurisa (the nature of) S.327/P, 457 

Ubhe tappurisa S.326/P, 456 

Yutattha, (being related and relevant) S.316/P, 444 

S Taddhita 

*e, o"(Vuddhi-substitute vowels) S.401/P, 561 

Absolute grammatical rule vs. conditional grammatical 
rule as per common usage pattern and relevant 
applicability S.352/P, 518 

Abyaya Taddhita (indeclinables) $.397-399/P, 557 

Adesa Procedure S.404/P, 570 

Agama Procedure S.404/P, 568 

Ane’ka’ttha Taddhita S.350-353/P, 506 

Apacca Taddhita (nouns in patronymic affix) S.344-349/P, 
495 

Bhava Taddhita (abstract condition) S.360,361,362/P, 528 

ivanna S.405/P, 571 

koti(crores) to infinity S.395/P, 556 

Lopa Procedure S.404/P, 567 

Name of Twelve Months S.352/P, 516 

n-containing affixes S.396/P, 557 

Samüha Taddhita S.354-355/P, 523 

Sankhya Taddhita S.373-395/P, 539 


892 


Index 


Ta’dassa’tthi Taddhita (quality or possession) S.364-370/P, 
532 

Ta'dassathana Taddhita(source or cause) S.356/P, 525 

Ta’ ppakati Taddhita (made up of, crafted with) S.372/P, 538 

Tabbahula Taddhita (prominent nature) S.359/P, 528 

Taddhita (the nature of noun-enhancers) S.344/P, 495 

Tannissita Taddhita (dependent nature or source) S.358/P, 
527 

Upama Taddhita (analogious similitude) S.357/P, 526 

uvanna S.405/P, 571 

Vikara Procedure S.404/P, 568 

Viparita Procedure S.404/P, 569 

Visesa Taddhita (superlative) S.363/P, 531 

Vuddhi (the definition of)) S.405/P, 571 

Vuddhi Procedure S.404/P, 566 

vuddhi-function Sutta S.400/P, 560 


6 Akhyata 


“ya” affix S.440,447/P, 630 

Abbhasa (extra syllable), 646 

Ajjatani (Aorist) S.428/P, 591 

Anuvuddhi (follow-up procedure of Vuddhi) 
S.513,514,515/P, 661 

Asabba dhatuka vibatti (See footnote) S.431/P, 593 

Asamyoganta (non-conjunct) S.483/P, 661 

atha (various meanings of) S.406/P, 575 

Attanopada S.407/P, 577 

Bhavissanti (Future) S.429/P, 592 

CAUSATIVE VERBS P., 609 

Deleting *n" of all causative karita affixes S.523/P, 684 

Deleting the last vowel in multi-stem roots S.521/P, 682 

Dhatu (root) S.457/P, 644 

Dhatu-paccaya also Dhatu niddittha affixes S.455/P, 643 

Eight Akhyata verb-groups S.445-452/P, 637 

Eight Modes of verbs S.414-422/P, 583 


893 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 


Eight Vibattis(verb-terminations) S.423-430/P, 588 

Formative System of Pali Verbs P., 594 

Hiyyattani (Past perfect) S.427/P, 591 

Impersonal voice P., 616 

Kalatipatti (Conditional) S.430/P, 592 

Karita Paccaya, or causative affixes S.438/P, 627 

kha, cha, sa (Desiderative verb affixes) S.434/P, 623 

Mahasutta (Great Sutta of all morphological functions) 
S.391,517,404,571/P, 678 

Nama-dhatu kiriya nominal-stem verbs 
S.435,436,437,439/P, 624 

Onomatopoetic verb affixes S.435-437/P, 624 

paccaya-the affixes S.432/P, 620 

Paficami (The imperative) S.424/P, 588 

Parassapada S.406/P, 576 

Paro puriso (Applicable rule in a sentence of multiple 
persons as subjects) S.409/P, 579 

Parokkha (Past imperfect) S.426/P, 590 

PLAIN VERBS (Active voice) P., 602 

PLAIN VERBS (Passive Voice) P., 607 

Pubbarüpa (assimilation of affix to the root-end consonant) 
S.443/P, 635 

Purisa (three persons) S.408/P, 578 

Reduplication procedure of certain verbs S.458/P, 645 

Reversal of Attanopada into Parassapada procedure 
S.518/P, 679 

Rules of Active Voice Sentence P., 613 

Rules of Passive Voice Sentence P., 615 

Sabbadhatuka vibatti S.431/P, 593 

Sattami (the optative) S.425/P, 589 

The Affix and its impact on verb-form P., 600 

Two kinds of ya-affixed verbs S.440/P, 630 

Two main groups of verbs S.406,407/P, 577 

Uttamapurisa (The high or last person) S.412/P, 582 

Vattamana-termination (Present Indicative) S.423/P, 588 


894 


Index 


VIBATTI TABLE P., 598 

Vikarana Paccaya affixes S.445-452/P, 637 
Voice of attanopada-group verbs S.453/P, 641 
Voice of prassapada-group verbs S.456/P, 643 
Vuddhi procedure on verbs S.483,484,485/P, 661 


7 Kibbidhana 


Garu (types of) S.602, 603/P, 747 

Karita-affix Recognition Procedure S.621/P, 759 

kha affix S.560/P, 715 

Kicca affixes S.545/P, 706 

Kita’ntogadha(a hybrid of Kita & compound noun ) 
S.524/P, 687 

Kita-affixes S.546/P, 706 

List of r-containing affixes S.539/P, 700 

List of r-containing functions S.539/P, 700 

mana , anta (present participle affix) S.565/P, 718 

Recognition as noun procedure S.601/P, 746 

Sadanas & their roles P., 685 

ta affix, its tenses & uses S.556,557/P, 714 

ta, tavantu, tavi affixes S.555/P, 712 

tabba, aniya affixes S.540/P, 701 

Tassila(habitual pattern) etc, S.532/P, 694 

tave, tum affix S.561,562,563/P, 716 

tuna, tvana, tva (gerund or absolutive affixes) S.564/P, 
717 

8 Unadi 

ghin-affix S.651/P, 796 

Guna vs. Vuddhi S.642, 406, 407/P, 785 

Hetu-Kattu Sadhana S.641/P, 784 

Patipadika P., 769, 816, 818, 819, 823 

ssantu, mana, ana (future participle affixes in the context of 
a Kamma) S.655/P, 799 


895 


Kaccayana Pali Vyakaranarh 
Three meanings of tabba, antya-affixed words S.635/P, 


772 
Upadha, (A nearby word, penultimate syllable) S.629/P, 769 


896 


ABOUT PARIYATTI 


Pariyatti is dedicated to providing affordable access to authentic 
teachings of the Buddha about the Dhamma theory (pariyatti) 
and practice (patipatti) of Vipassana meditation. A 501(c)(3) 
non-profit charitable organization since 2002, Pariyatti is 
sustained by contributions from individuals who appreciate and 
want to share the incalculable value of the Dhamma teachings. 
We invite you to visit www.pariyatti.org to learn about our 
programs, services, and ways to support publishing and other 
undertakings. 


Pariyatti Publishing Imprints 


Vipassana Research Publications (focus on Vipassana as taught 
by S.N. Goenka in the tradition of Sayagyi U Ba Khin) 


BPS Pariyatti Editions (selected titles from the Buddhist 
Publication Society, co-published by Pariyatti in the Americas) 


Pariyatti Digital Editions (audio and video titles, including 
discourses) 


Pariyatti Press (classic titles returned to print and inspirational 
writing by contemporary authors) 


Pariyatti enriches the world by 


* disseminating the words of the Buddha, 
* providing sustenance for the seeker’s journey, 
* illuminating the meditator's path. 


